The Suttanipāta is the fifth book of the Khuddaka Nikāya of the Pali canon. It is mainly verse, with a few prose sections filling out the narrative background. 

The poems are vivid, personal, and direct. They are highly concentrated, eschewing the repetition of the prose suttas; a little has a lot of flavor. They reward slow and reflective reading. 

The Suttanipāta is unique to the Pali tradition. There are no parallel works in the Tibetan or Chinese canons, nor any references to it in the northern traditions. 

While there are no parallels to the whole, there are many parallels to specific poems; among others, the Ratanasutta, Khaggavisāṇasutta, and Aṭṭhakavagga have important parallels outside the Pali canon. In addition, several texts, such as the Selasutta, are found elsewhere in the Pali canon. And as always, individual verses are scattered across the many verse collections in all schools of Buddhism.

The Suttanipāta has a unique structure, in that it is comprised (almost) entirely of *poems*, that is, coherent sets of verses. Other early Buddhist verse collections typically consist of assemblages of individual verses loosely connected by theme (Dhammapada), or verses associated with a prose background story (Udāna, Jātaka). In the Thera- and Therīgāthā, verses are collected because of their association with a given monk or nun. Some of these are poems, but we also find individual verses or clusters of verses with no particular relation to others under the same person. 

Perhaps the closest literary cousin of the Suttanipāta would be the Sagāthāvagga of the Saṁyutta Nikāya, which likewise consists of various sets of verses, often in dialogue form, and with a minimal narrative background. Several of the Suttanipāta texts are in fact shared with the Sagāthāvagga, such as the Kasibhāradvājasutta (Snp 1.4).

The poems of the Suttanipāta are, like all early Buddhist texts, organized in _vaggas_ (“chapters”). Unusually, all the _vaggas_ of the Suttanipāta consist of more than ten texts. 

The first three vaggas have only slender thematic connections. However the final two chapters—Aṭṭhakavagga and Pārāyanavagga—are tightly knit, and evidently existed as self-contained works before being added to the Suttanipāta. They are referred to by name in several places in the prose Suttas, and the Aṭṭhakavagga has a parallel in the Chinese canon. 

These chapters, together with certain other texts such as the Khaggavisāṇasutta, show signs of being old texts. This has led to the oft-repeated claim that the Suttanipāta is a uniquely early text. It is not. Many of the poems in the Suttanipāta are not especially early, and some of them are quite late, notably the opening verses of the Nālakasutta (Snp 3.11) and  the introduction to the Pārāyanavagga (Snp 5.1). 

Even in the cases of the early verses, there is no compelling reason to consider them as any earlier than the prose Suttas. And these sections are themselves comprised of elements of differing periods; the Introduction to the Pārāyanavagga, for example, is later than the questions that follow it.

Since the collection is primarily organized by literary style rather than topic, it contains texts on a wide variety of themes. These themes are familiar elsewhere in Buddhist texts, and I will briefly summarize them here.

- The virtues of renunciation and the proper life of the ascetic (eg. Snp 1.1, Snp 1.3)
- Ethical virtues and dangers (eg. Snp 1.6, Snp 1.7)
- Revaluation of contemporary, often Brahmanical, views (eg. Snp 1.4, Snp 2.7)
- Conversion of native deities (Snp 1.9, Snp 1.10, Snp 2.5)
- The virtues of the Buddha and the Triple Gem (eg. Snp 2.1, Snp 3.7)
- Biography of the Buddha (eg. Snp 3.1, Snp 3.2, Snp 3.10, Snp 3.11, Snp 4.15)
- Meditation and mental development (eg. Snp 1.8, Snp 1.11, Snp 2.10)
- Philosophy, especially of causation and not-self (eg. Snp 3.12, Snp 4.11)
- Letting go of disputatious views (eg. Snp 4.3, Snp 4.12, Snp 4.13)

I would add a word of caution against over-interpreting the text. Perhaps the most striking themes, sometimes taken as emblematic of the collection as a whole, are the first and last in the above list: the virtues of renunciation, and the dangers of disputatious views. If one assumes that the Suttanipāta is a uniquely archaic text, it is tempting to see these positions as more authentic to the Buddha’s original teachings than the bulk of the prose texts. This is not the case. The virtue of renunciation and a simple wandering life is mentioned in many places in the prose Suttas, as is the danger of getting involved in disputations based on theoretical views. Perhaps they are emphasized more in the Suttanipāta, but this is hardly a sign of any substantially different doctrine. It is a mistake to develop a theory of Early Buddhism based on a few verses.

There is no overall thematic development in the text, so the reader can start wherever they like. The only exception is the final chapter, which is one long Sutta and should be read as a whole.

## The Snake Chapter

The chapter offers advice for lay folk, counters the pretensions of the brahmins, and co-opts the animist worship of native spirits. But it begins and ends with a direct statement on the life that the Buddha believed to be most worth living: a mendicant who “sheds this world and the next”, “the sage meditating secluded in the woods”. While the structure of the chapter is certainly loose, I think this thematic return suggests that it was compiled with an overall plan in mind. 

### The Snake

The Suttanipāta opens with the Uragasutta ([snp1.1]), which draws out the metaphor of a snake shedding its skin. It was a popular poem, judging by the existence of parallels found in the Gāndhārī Dharmapada, Patna Dhammapada, and Udānavarga. A comparative study by Ven Ānandajoti concluded that, while the text is old, verses 6 and 10–13 in the Pali were likely added later, for they are not found in the parallels.

Most of us will encounter the snake metaphor from the safety of our comfortable and snake-free homes. Even in Australia—and I’m sorry to disappoint—it isn’t really the case that deadly snakes lurk around every corner. Having said which, I’m writing this from my father’s home in the hills up from Coffs Harbour. There was once was a huge python sleeping beneath the bed I’m using. And another in the workshop. But they are mostly harmless, unlike the black snake that slithered across the TV while people were watching it. But it’s the brown snakes that you have to watch out for, and the tiger snakes, and the cunningly-named death adder. But I promise, not everywhere in Australia is like this! Anyway, we have anti-venom, and few people die of snakebite in Australia. In India, on the other hand, snakes are still a deadly menace, killing around 58,000 people each year. 

So while we might relate to a snake sentimentally, appreciating its cool elegance, for the mendicants living in the forests 2,500 years ago, a snakebite meant death. Indeed, the Pali texts record many monks dying this way (eg. [an4.67]). When the Uragasutta compares a mendicant with a snake, it is associating them with a dangerous and mysterious power over life and death. Elsewhere, the Suttas warn us to beware of five things when they are young: a prince, a snake, a fire, and a mendicant ([sn3.1]). Each of these may look harmless when small, but can be deadly when grown.

A snake often appears in a negative aspect: a taker of life, a loathsome spitter of poison, a shape-shifting master of deception. But the impression that the snake makes on the human mind is nothing if not complicated. We are afraid and fascinated in equal measure. One of the snake’s many astonishing properties is its ability to shed its skin. And in this we can see a manifestation of its deathly power not for destruction but for transformation.

The first verse offers a succinct summary of the entire Buddhist path, employing the snake metaphor in both dark and bright aspects.

>When anger surges, they drive it out,   
as with medicine a snake’s spreading venom.   
Such a mendicant sheds this world and the next,   
as a snake its old worn-out skin.

The first couplet reflects where we are: riven with anger. If anger is a poison, then there is on the one hand a threat to life; but on the other, there is a possibility of a cure. Now, the treatments available at that time—which involved using disgusting substances like ash or dung as an emetic ([pli-tv-kd6:14.6.1])—were risky at best. But survival was not impossible, because the venom was still “spreading”: it is an active, ongoing process, not something that is fated or destined. If anger is likewise “spreading”, it too can be arrested.

Thus far the teaching aligns with what we might expect from a psychologist, or indeed, from common sense. But now the verse inverts the snake metaphor. The death threatened in the opening manifests as something rather more mysterious: the shedding of skin, abandoning “this world and the next”. The Pali here is _orapāraṁ_, more literally, “the near shore and the far”. Often these terms refer to the mundane world of suffering and the transcendence realization of Nibbana, but here they must refer to “this world” in which one is born, and “another world” to which one goes after death, so I have translated accordingly. Verses commonly employ non-standard terms, whether for poetic expressiveness, or simply to fit the metre.

Whereas most psychology aims to alleviate extremes of distress and promote a healthy and balanced happiness, and most religion offers a promise of bliss in a future life, the Buddha promised something quite different: freedom. 

Taking the metaphor on face value and without regard for context, one might infer that the Sutta is teaching that the true essence of a person lives inside their “skin”—i.e. the ephemeral physical body—and that when they shed their “skin” they will reveal this true essence. Such a reading would support the theory, which has become popular in modern times, that the Buddha’s teaching was essentially the same as that of the Upaniṣads.  

However, if the Buddha wanted to teach the survival of an abiding essence, he could surely have done a better job of it. Long before he appeared, the snake metaphor had already been employed to express this idea. Consider the following verse from Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad 4.4.7:

>This corpse lies as lifeless as the slough of a snake shed in an anthill. But this incorporeal, immortal life-breath is sheer divinity, sheer incandescence.

Like the Uragasutta, this employs a snake shedding its skin as a metaphor for spiritual transcendence. But the passage goes on to speak of an essential force that is divine, radiant, and immortal. This is the concept of the transcendent Self that is so prominent in the Upaniṣads and so conspicuously absent from the Uragasutta, and which the Buddha rejected on so many occasions.

That said, the shared metaphor does raise a question. Is it simply a result of various sages independently observing a common feature of nature and applying it as a spiritual metaphor? Or is the Buddhist text consciously responding to the earlier usage of the metaphor, and possibly even to this specific Upaniṣadic passage? This question invite us to take a closer look at the context. 

The Upaniṣadic quote is a comment on a verse that speaks of releasing all the heart’s desires. The entire chapter is concerned with the passage of the “Self” from this world to the next world, and how this is propelled by a person’s deeds (_karma_). Indeed, it is in this chapter that we find perhaps the earliest clear statement of the doctrine of _karma_ as moral deeds (BrhUp 4.4.5). This idea is so central to Buddhism that it is tempting to believe it was a commonly accepted notion at the time. But it is not found in the earlier Vedic texts, and here it is introduced in an esoteric dialogue. And even here it is not presented as a doctrine universally accepted, for others are said hold a different belief: the self is purely desire, and attains that for which it wishes. In this alternate theory, it is the force of will that matters, not the moral quality of actions.

This means there are at least two details in this passage that echo ideas found in the Suttas: the snake shedding its skin, and the doctrine of _karma_. Now, it often happens that when you notice one detail shared between the Suttas and the Upaniṣads, you’ll soon find another. And it turns out that in these passages, there are not just two, but many ideas, phrases, and metaphors running parallel. Here are a few of them:

- the ancient way that is rediscovered (BrhUp 4.4.8; cp. [sn12.65:7.1]); 
- the aged body like a cart (BrhUp 4.3.35; cp. [dn16:2.25.11]); 
- the ability to see the effects of merit and demerit (BrhUp 4.3.15 ff., BrhUp 4.3.34; cp. [dn2:95.2]); 
- comparing heavenly realms through multiplication (BrhUp 4.3.33; cp. [an8.43]); 
- the functions of seeing, hearing, thinking, etc. (BrhUp 4.3.23 ff.; cp. [snp4.12:10.1]); 
- the image of freedom as detachment of a mango from its stalk (BrhUp 4.3.36; cp. [dn1:3.73.4]); 
- the phrasing of identification with the Self as “I am this” (BrhUp  4.4.12: _ayamasmīti_; cp. [sn35.248:3.1]: _ayamahamasmīti_); 
- the idea that the ignorant suffer (BrhUp 4.4.14; cp. [an4.171:5.2]); 
- the observation that thinking is fatiguing compared to awareness (BrhUp 4.4.21; cp. [mn19:8.8]); 
- giving up desire for children, renouncing the home and the worldy “quest” (_eṣana_), and wandering as a mendicant in search of truth (BrhUp 4.4.22,; cp. [snp1.3:1.3]); 
- the identification of the state transcending rebirth 
  - as that which is unborn, unaging, undying, and fearless (Bhu 4.4.25; cp. [ud8.3:3.1], [sn6.13:3.4]); 
  - as that that which neither increases nor decreases (BrhUp 4.4.23; cp. [an8.19:15.2]); 
  - as that which is the negation of everything (BrhUp 4.3.22; cp. [an11.9:7.3]);
  - as the divinity that is the cosmos (BrhUp 4.4.13: _tasya lokaḥ, sa u loka eva_; cp. [sn22.81:10.7]: _so attā so loko_). 

The next chapter has even more, but I’ll stop there. Independently, each point may be simply a coincidence, but taken as a whole they paint a compelling picture. There’s hardly a verse that doesn’t remind of the Suttas in some way. And the similarity is not just in specifics, for the emphasis on paradoxical phrasing and mysterious transcendence sounds a lot like an Upaniṣad. Clearly this passage is closely connected with the Suttas, and it seems to me unlikely that it is a mere thematic affinity or coincidence. 

The closeness is not just in content but in historical context as well. These chapters were spoken by the sage Yājñavalkya to King Janaka of Videha, perhaps a century or two before the Buddha. It is a curious thing that the Buddha, in his only recorded visit to Videha, spoke with and ultimately converted Brahmāyu, perhaps the oldest living brahmanical sage ([mn92]). Surely this text has a missionary purpose, to convert the most respected brahmin in this ancient home of some of the most famous brahmanical dialogues. It’s even possible that Brahmāyu was a direct student of Yājñavalkya. Regardless, there are many instances where the Buddha’s teaching clearly echoes and responds to that of Yājñavalkya, and we will encounter this again in the Suttanipāta, especially the final chapter.

Similarity, however, does not mean identity. If the Buddha was drawing on and echoing ideas from these dialogues, he did not do so uncritically; the differences are just as important as the similarities.

Yājñavalkya expresses his view with clarity and elegance: the Self is the person made of consciousness, the immortal light in the heart among the vital energies (BrhUp 4.3.7). There is no mistaking what he meant. The folk who have tried to extract a similar view from the Suttas are reduced to seeking out in dusty allusions and twisted metaphors the same thing that Yājñavalkya had already stated directly.

Given this context, might it be that the Snake Sutta was composed as a deliberate rejoinder to Yājñavalkya? It’s possible, but it’s hard to say definitively. This is often the case in the Suttas: the Upaniṣadic view is there, but not explicitly, so it is easy to overlook. Only when seeing the overall pattern does it become clear. 

But I would make another proposal. The Suttanipāta as a whole ends with the Pārāyanavagga, a series of conversations with brahmins that closely evoke the Upaniṣads. I think the Snake Sutta was added at the beginning of the Suttanipāta to frame the entire collection as an implicit rejection of the Upaniṣadic doctrine. Right from the beginning, we hear an unequivocal rejection of any positive assertion of a Self, the core of Yājñavalkya’s teaching.

The Buddha adopts that which is of value in Yājñavalkya’s analysis: namely, that desire, hate, and ignorance create suffering and bind us to a cycle of rebirth. But when speaking of *shedding* the skin, he says nothing of a new or revealed state of the Self. It is the shedding itself that is the point. They find “no substance” in any existence, going beyond “any state of existence” because they know that it is all “not what it seems”. His response to the Upaniṣads is subtle and nuanced; what he does *not* say is as significant as what he does say.

### With Dhaniya the Cowherd

The second discourse, Dhaniyasutta ([snp1.2]) is of a very different nature. Here we leave aside calls to transcendence and subtle paradoxes for a dramatic dialogue between the Buddha and a farmer. While the farmer speaks of his worldly safety and contentment, the Buddha betters him with his spiritual contentment. 

The exchange is interrupted by a thunderstorm that rather conveniently illustrates the Buddha’s point. This, and the unexpected appearance of Māra near the end, lend the dialogue a dramatic flair. 

Within the Suttanipāta as a whole, it functions as a more playful and accessible entry point after the somewhat forbidding opening poem. In this, the form echoes a number of other collections, which similarly begin with an intimidating, difficult text, followed by a more practical and accessible one (eg. [dn1] and [dn2], or [mn1] and [mn2]).

### The Rhinoceros Horn

With the third discourse, the famous Khaggavisāṇasutta ([snp1.3]) we have another change in mood. Here we find neither philosophical paradoxes nor dramatic dialogue, but a heartfelt and pragmatic plea for the solitary life of a wandering ascetic. 

The poem strikes an uncompromising tone, a principled rejection of worldly attachments, regardless of the pain, and an equally unsentimental acknowledgement of the tribulations of a solitary life in the forest. In this, it lies closer to the Jains than to the brahmins. Perhaps, then, we could read the three opening Suttas as responses to brahmanical philosophy, enjoyment of the lay life, and asceticism respectively.

The imagery is tough and masculine: rejecting affection, living independent like a lion, suspicious of others’ motives; not to mention the imagery of the rhino horn. An overly harsh attitude to seclusion can lead to a certain hard-heartedness, so the poem does not neglect to mention the development of love and compassion. Indeed, when the Sutta is quoted in the Apadāna, there is an extra “lost verse” right at the start, which begins the whole discourse speaking of love and compassion ([tha-ap2:9.3]). It gives rather a different framing to the poem.

This poem, alongside the final two chapters of the Suttanipāta, received a commentary in the canonical Niddesa. All three texts, it seems, were independently well-known before their inclusion in the Suttanipāta. They are, however, far from the only texts that have a canonical commentary. For example, most of the central doctrinal passages have a commentary in the Abhidhamma, while the _pāṭimokkha_ has a commentary in the Vinaya Vibhaṅga. Indeed, many Suttas can be considered as commentaries on teachings propounded elsewhere. Even the second sutta, the Anattalakkhaṇasutta, can be regarded as a commentary on the first sermon, drawing out the implications of the five aggregates that were mentioned in passing there.

What makes the Khaggavisāṇasutta special is not the fact of its commentary, but its endorsement of the solitary life. But we should take care in what we infer from this. The tradition—including the commentary, the Apadāna, and xxx—is unanimous in attributing these verses to the _paccekabuddhas_ of legend, a mysterious class of enlightened sages who lived a solitary life of meditation without establishing a dispensation. Rejecting this, scholars such as Jayawickrama and Saddhatissa argued that the sutta represents an early period of ascetic Buddhism before settled monastic life. Bhikkhu Bodhi points out that the weight of evidence suggests that monastic life started early in Buddhism, and instead suggests these may have been verses for a class of forest-dwelling, reclusive mendicants. 

But there are a couple of verses in the Khaggavisāṇasutta that, to my mind, suggest a quite different origin. Verses 11 and 12 nuance the virtue of solitariness: if you can find a good companion, that is best, but if not, live alone. While this is more conciliatory than the sterner stuff typical of the Khaggavisāṇasutta, the following verse 13 has a similar message, so they are not completely off base. Nonetheless, these verses are clearly an interpolation to the text, since they are not found in the Mahāvastu and have a different form than usual in this sutta: they are a pair, as the first verse lacks the usual ending tag line and instead leads on to the second.  Indeed, these verses occur independently in a quite different context, which is found in the Vinaya ([pli-tv-kd10:3.1.32]–39), as well as [mn128:6.30]–37 and [ja428:8.1]–9.4. The verses also occur independently at  [dhp328]–9, and in the repeated full Khaggavisāṇasutta at [tha-ap2:20.1]–21.4). 

Now, the background to these verses concerns the so-called incident at Kosambi. There monks had a rather disspiriting falling-out, allowing a trivial difference of opinion to spiral into an acrimonious dispute. The Buddha, unable to reconcile them, gave up and retreated alone in the forest, where he spoke these verses. This famous story is, oddly, overlooked entirely in the commentary to the Khaggavisāṇasutta. But surely it gives us a clue to the role such verses play in the community.

Each verse of the Khaggavisāṇasutta is an *ought*. When a spiritual teacher sees that a community is out of balance, they teach what people should do, not what they are already doing. This only makes sense as a reaction to increasing settledness and institutionalization. Monastic life, to this day, has a tension between a life of institutionalized security and one of wandering freedom. This is part of the core dynamic of our communities. It cannot be resolved by a decree; all mendicants feel the call of the solitary life. To live alone, aloof from the dramas and desires of other people, the open road and the creatures and the trees your only companions; who has not felt the yearning for such a life?

While it doesn’t affect the above argument, I should note that there is a confusion in these verses that needs clearing up. The reading of the two verses differs in the editions. The Pali Text Society edition abbreviates the tag line with just _eko care_, implying that it should be expanded as the usual “wander alone like a rhinoceros horn” (_eko care khaggavisāṇakappo_). The Buddha Jayanthi Tipitaka edition spells out the “rhinoceros” tag here, supporting the PTS reading. This has been followed by Norman and Bodhi, who both note that this line differs from its parallels. If this reading is correct, then these verses have been adapted to this context by giving them the “rhinoceros” tag.  In the Mahāsaṅgīti edition, however, these verses are essentially identical with their parallels, ending with the tag “wander alone like a tusker in the wilds” (_eko care mātaṅgaraññeva nāgo_). That this is no oversight is clear from the fact that MS acknowledges the PTS and BJT variant. The commentary is no help, as it is silent on this line. However, in the Therāpadāna version, the “elephant” tag is found in all three editions. The Mahāsaṅgīti edition, however, has the “rhinoceros” version in the Niddesa ([cnd23:140.4]), as does the BJT and apparently also the PTS, though once again it is abbreviated. The Mahāsaṅgīti readings throughout are the same as the VRI edition on which it is based, representing the Burmese edition of the Sixth Council. Clearly the last line of the verse originally referred to an “elephant”, and it was changed to “rhinoceros” to fit the context. The question is, was this done consciously when the text was included in the canon, or is it a mere editorial slipup at some point in the transmission? I’m inclined to the second. Thus I translate following the MS edition, which reads these verses as identical with their parallels, and assume the changed tag on the last line in PTS and BJT is an artefact of careless editing.

### With Bhāradvāja the Farmer

With the fourth Sutta, we see a return to a brahmanical context, but this time in a more conventional way. The Kasibhāradvājasutta ([snp1.4]), which is found also in the Saṁyutta ([sn7.1]) with a shorter narrative portion, tells us of a brahmin who works as a farmer. To celebrate the sowing season, he distributes food for anyone who comes. 

It’s worth noting that the name Bhāradvāja is used in the Suttas as a conventional appellation for a (usually snooty) brahmin, and it is regularly prepended with a nickname which is simply the thing discussed in the Sutta. Here _kasi_ means simply “farming”. Below we shall meet the Bhāradvāja _aggika_, which means “fire-worshipper”. These are more like descriptive epithets than personal names.

Hymns for farming are found as far back as the old Vedic tradition, many centuries before the Upaniṣads. The Vedic hymns focus on the celebration of abundance and prosperity in life, and that includes agriculture. Early Vedic hymns include invocations to the “Lord of the Field” to bless the ploughing and the crops (Rig Veda 4.57.4). These invocations did not remain merely as dead letters, for they are cited in much later ritual texts, which say that a brahmin should recite them when touching the plough (Saṅkhāyana Grihya Sūtra 4.13). Such verses, and others (eg. Rig Veda 10.101.3), invoke the different parts of the ploughing—goad, plough, seed, furrow—in a way not dissimilar to the Kasibhāradvājasutta. Atharvaveda 6.142.3 says that the “givers” of the grain shall be inexhaustible, perhaps suggesting a food distribution practice.

To pour seed on the ground is an act of faith: the belief that, gods willing, the seed will grow and supply food the next year. By distributing food—the fruits of last year’s sowing—the brahmin is mirroring the act of sowing itself, and thus amplifying its fruitfulness. That this is not an entirely selfless act becomes apparent when he sees the Buddha, and tells him he can only eat if he farms. His distrust of ascetics hails from the more worldly traditions of the Vedas, rather than the mystical path of renunciate sages like Yājñavalkya. 

Drawing on similar rhetorical tactics that he used in the Dhaniyasutta, the Buddha ascribes a spiritual meaning to each of the items of the farmer. This kind of point-by-point spiritual metaphor is a characteristic of the Upaniṣads, especially in those portions that ascribe a hidden meaning to each aspect of the ritual and the rites. That this is central to the Upaniṣadic project is shown by the fact that the Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad opens with such a set of correspondences (_sandhi_). 

>The head of the sacrificial horse is the dawn; its eye is the sun; its vital breath is the wind …

And so it goes. It was in this way that the Upaniṣadic philosophers were able to break new ground, extending and deepening their philosophy, while still maintaining that they were continuing the same tradition. Hence the leitmotif of the Upaniṣads: _ya evam veda_ “one who knows this …”. Each act, each detail, has a higher meaning, which a true brahmin understands. The Buddha is using exactly the same technique to convince the brahmin that there is a higher meaning behind his traditional duties. 

In a curious twist, the brahmin offers his milk-rice to the Buddha “whose farming has the deathless as its fruit”. The Buddha rejects his offering—a very rare circumstance, as mendicants are normally required to accept any offering with gratitude and humility. The poem says this food has been “enchanted by a spell”, and indeed, when it is discarded it sizzles and fumes in the water. 

The implications of this episode are complex. Dietary laws were, and are, fundamental to the notion of caste in India. The brahmins—in theory—took only the purest food and did not share a plate with others. Āpastamba’s Dharmasastra says that the student “not leave any food uneaten. If he is unable to do so, he should bury the leftoers in the ground, [or] throw them in the water” (Kammic fluff???) This was in direct contrast with the practice of ascetics such as the Buddha, who accepted food from anyone without discrimination.

The brahmin has performed a ritual by chanting. That this is literally an “enchantment” rather than simply “chanting over” is shown by the fact that the food has acquired a mysterious magical property. The brahmin caste represents the divinity Brahmā on earth, from whom all power and creative force derive. In their belief system, they are a manifestation of divine energy, and through their chanting they channel that energy into the material realm. Thus the milk-rice is infused with a potency, which, like all power, is dangerous in the wrong hands. The Buddha can consume it, since his power supersedes that of Brahmā. Yet he chooses not to. The text is silent as to why. But we can speculate that the magical act of consuming such potent food would, in the eyes of the brahmins, mark the Buddha as an acolyte of Brahmā himself, else how could he survive it? By rejecting the ritually potent food, the Buddha is affirming his independence from the Brahmanical system. For him, food is simply a material means of sustenance.

### With Cunda the Smith

Next there follows the Cundasutta ([snp1.5]), which the Buddha apparently taught near the end of his life to the smith Cunda. It is omitted from the account of the meeting between Cunda and the Buddha in the Pali Mahāparinibbānasutta, but it is found in the Sanskrit versions of that text. Both the Sanskrit text and the Pali commentary give the same origin: a monk steals golden dish on which Cunda had served the meal. 

Seeing such a badly-behaved monk, Cunda asks the Buddha to define the different kinds of ascetic (_samaṇa_) that are found in the world. The Buddha gives three examples of good ascetics and one of bad. He encourages lay disciples to use discernment and not equate one with the other.

### Downfalls

Continuing the theme of practical advice for lay folk, we next find the first of the great popular Suttas of the Suttanipāta, the Parābhavasutta ([snp1.6]). This gives an extensive list of moral failings into which lay folk might fall, framed within the question of a deity in the manner of the Sagāthāvagga. It’s a perennially popular discourse for recitation and sermons. 

The ethics are not specifically Buddhist, but would have been broadly acceptable to anyone in the Buddha‘s culture, and for the most part, remain so today. It is notable, however, that the actor whose morality is discussed is assumed to be a straight male,  hence I have translated using the masculine gender.

### The Lowlife

In the Vasalasutta ([snp1.7]) we meet another Bhāradvāja, this time an orthodox fire-worshipping brahmin. The worship of fire is one of the oldest, if not the oldest, rites of humanity, and it was a part of the ancestral Indo-Aryan religion. There is an inherent tension between the performance of religious rituals and the principles of morality: if doing the ritual is trul effective, then why keep moral rules?

Like the other Bhāradvāja we have already met, this gentleman is no great fan of ascetics. When he sees the Buddha, he doesn’t just not offer him anything, but yells abuse, calling him a “shaveling, fake ascetic, lowlife”. While being met with abuse and ridicule in the village is a part of the mendicant’s life, Buddhist mendicants both past and present mostly encounter a warm and respectful welcome when on alms round, and abuse is very much the exception.

The Sutta details a series of moral failings in a way not dissimilar to the previous. The Buddha, responding to the personal attack on him, turns it around, claiming that one who abuses ascetics or reviles the Buddha is the real lowlife. He argues that deeds, not birth, make you a lowlife or a brahmin, implying that the brahmin himself is no brahmin but an outcaste. He further tells a story of an outcaste who lived a life of such virtue that he became a Brahmā divinity himself, implying that the brahmin had all this time been worshipping an outcaste. 

The Buddha points out that it is precisely those brahmins who are most often seen reciting hymns and performing pious deeds who turn out to be deeply involved in corrupt deeds. This remains as relevant to Buddhism now as it was to Brahmanism then.

### The Discourse on Love

Shifting to a positive mood, we next find the famous Mettasutta (“The Discourse on Love” [snp1.8]). Rather than a series of verses on a theme, this is a coherent poem divided roughly into three sections: verses 1–3ab lay the foundation for virtuous conduct; 4cd–6 describe the meditation on love; while verses 7–9 depict the exultant state of liberation that results. Verse 10 is in a different metre and appears to be a later addition, alluding to the development of insight for attaining first stream-entry, then non-return.

I now translate _mettā_ as “love” rather than the Buddhist neologism “loving-kindness”. The latter has become widely accepted, and is justified by arguing that “love” has too much of a sensual connotation. And it is true that Pali distinguishes sensual love (_kāma_, _pema_, etc.) from spiritual love (_mettā_), much like the Latin *eros* and *agape*. I once asked a Catholic contemplative monk about this. His native language was Italian. He said there is no equivalent distinction in modern Italian; they just use *amore* in both cases and let the context make the meaning clear. I adopted the same approach, and it seems to work fine. 

I suspect that the real reason for the popularity of “loving-kindness” is that modern Buddhists are often uncomfortable around expressing emotions. “Loving-kindness” is a more distancing word, it’s emotionally cooler than “love”. I prefer the more direct, ordinary language expression.

### The Buddha Teaches Sātāgira and Hemavata the Native Spirits

The next sutta finds two _yakkhas_ (“native spirits”) having a perhaps unlikely conversation about the Buddha’s spiritual qualities as they debate whether to visit him on the _uposatha_ (“Sabbath”), and proceed to ask a series of questions ([snp1.9]). The questions are of a vaguely riddling form—“In what has the world arisen?”—and seem to presuppose a serious interest in Buddhism, or at least, in the kinds of problems discussed among ancient Indian ascetics.

There’s nothing in the content itself, however, that suggests the speakers were _yakkhas_. Most of the verses are found elsewhere in the Saṁyuttanikāya, and it is likely that the current Sutta is a compilation.

Generally speaking, the _yakkhas_ of the Suttas are morally neutral, though they sometimes succumb to aggressive impulses. Rarely do they display such an elevated sense of morality. 

_Yakkhas_ are local deities, the spirits of particular places. Here their names are Sātāgira and Hemavata, which reveal them to be titulary deities of the mountainous regions: “Mount Sāta” and the Himalayas. They end by promising to travel far and wide spreading the good news of the Dhamma. This suggests that the verses acted as a missionary text for the Himalayan region, into which Buddhism was spreading in the century after the Buddha’s death.

### Āḷavaka the Native Spirit

The ferocious side of the _yakkhas_ is expressed by the monstrous Āḷavaka ([snp1.10]). He was given an extensive backstory in Pali commentaries, and a quite different one in the Dhammapada that was translated into Chinese as the Fa-chu pi-yu-ching (T 211, pp. 575–609; translated as *The Scriptural Text: Verses of the Doctrine, with Parables*, pp. 215–219). 

He comes out full of bully and bluster in the prose narrative, but the verses settle down to a conventional exchange of Dhamma questions. 

Āḷavaka, like Sātāgira and Hemavata, is a titular deity who announced his zeal for spreading the Dhamma, but his town Āḷavī was less remote, lying between Sāvatthī and Rājagaha. 

### Victory

Though separated by two Suttas, the Vijayasutta (“Victory”, [snp1.11]) might be considered as a pair with the Mettasutta, as the former teaches the meditation on love that overcomes hate, while this teaches the meditation on the parts of the body that overcomes desire (verse 11, _kāye chandaṁ virājaye_). This meditation is found commonly in the Suttas, and here is expressed in poetic form.

### The Sage

The final Sutta of the chapter, the Munisutta (“The Sage”, [snp1.12]) exalts the solitary life of the renunciate. The imagery of the steadfast sage aloof from worldly impulses brings us full circle with the Uragasutta and the Khaggavisāṇasutta. 

In contrast with the Kasibhāradvājasutta, rather than co-opting the imagery of agricultural flourishing, here the Buddha defiantly opposes it, speaking of ending new growth. The metaphors draw upon a specific set of ideas found more explicitly in prose suttas such as [sn22.54].

## The Lesser Chapter

The second chapter is similar in themes and poetic forms to the first, but it seems to lack even the loose plan found there. 

### Gems

In between two sets of benedective verses, the Ratanasutta offers a subtle and insightful survey of the famed Triple Gem—the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Saṅgha. Note that here, as elsewhere in the Suttas, these are not actually called “Gems”. Rather, the “gems” are good qualities that are found in them, much like the gemstones found in the great ocean ([an8.19:8.1]). But it seems likely that the idea of the “Triple Gem” evolved from this Sutta.

Each verse ends in a tag line. But usually such tags will make a statement of fact: “this is a cause of downfall” or “this is the highest blessing”. Here, however, the tag line is a “blessing” in imperative form—“may there be well-being” or more colloquially, “may you be well”. This wish (_sotthi hotu_) is elsewhere found in a more everyday sense, as a simple plea for safety ([dn3:1.23.11]). The sense here, with the implication that the power of truthful words will have a powerful effect in themselves, finds its only early parallel in the Aṅgulimālasutta.  There, powerful words of truth wishing well for a mother in travail resulted in a successful birth and healthy mother and child ([mn86:15.8]). 

Such texts skirt a fine line. They don’t exactly say that the words of Dhamma exert a magical force, but they don’t exactly not say that either. It’s possible to read them as words of encouragement and uplift, whose effects are purely motivational. But that is surely not how generations of Buddhists have taken them.

The doctrinal content of the Ratanasutta leans heavily on concepts and ideas developed in the prose Suttas, and much of it would be incomprehensible on its own. A stream-enterer, for example, is said to “not take up an eighth life”, which draws on the notion that a stream-enterer, having uprooted certain fundamental fetters, is reborn no more than seven times.

A more subtle example is the “immersion with immediate fruit” spoke of in verse five, said to be the unequalled state of meditation. This is not a common technical term in the Suttas. The key term is “immediate” (_ānantarika_). This only occurs in one other Sutta, which is one of the latest in the canon, and there it is only said that such a state is hard to comprehend ([dn34:1.2.21]).

_Ānantarika_ is closely aligned with a spectrum of more familiar terms—_akālika_, _sandiṭṭhika_, _diṭṭheva dhamme_—all of which convey the sense that the Dhamma is to be realized “in this very life”, as opposed to a religious practice that only bears fruit in a future life (_samparāyika_). Thus the “immersion of immediate result” is the practice of _jhāna_ within the context of the eightfold path, which results in the realization of the noble fruits. Compare the case of the Buddha’s former teachers, whose path resulted a state of rebirth in a refined and long-lasting heavenly realm, which was nonetheless still impermanent and not free from suffering. Both traditiions practice deep _samādhi_, but only when informed by the right view of the four noble truths will that _samādhi_ lead to awakening.

The presence of benedictive verses at the beginning and end; the framing of each verse as a blessing; and the prominence of advanced doctrinal content all make it tempting to think that the Ratanasutta must stem from a slightly later phase within the early texts. If that is true, however, it can’t be very late, for the Ratanasutta has a close parallel in the Mahāvastu of the Mahāsaṅghika school. Given that the Mahāsaṅghika and the Theravāda split in the first schism, perhaps two centuries after the Buddha, it’s likely that the composition predates this. And this in turn gives us a framework for assessing the likely date of similarly late-seeming compositions. 

### Putrescence

The Āmagandhasutta (“Putrescence”, [snp2.2]) is one of the few early discourses to directly discuss vegetarianism. An unnamed interlocuter claims that pure folk only eat vegetables, not lying to get what they want. The list of foods appears to be purely wild vegetables and grains, so he appears to be advocating a diet of vegan food gathered from nature. This was a traditional ascetic practice found among certain circles. In the Jātaka stories we hear many times of brahmin renunciates who retreated to the Himalayas to live on such a diet, which was regarded as a special mark of ascetic prowess (eg. [ja536]). The speaker, it would seem, is familiar with such ascetics. He criticizes “Kassapa” for eating delicious food cooked by others. And he calls out Kassapa’s hypocrisy in claiming that “putrescence is not proper for me”, yet all the while he is eating rice with the flesh of fowl. This seems to be the basis on which he hints Kassapa has lied to get good food.

The word translated as “putrescence” is _āmagandha_, literally “raw smell”. It’s the smell of a rotting corpse, and doesn’t have any intrinsic connection to meat-eating. Rather, it appears throughout the Suttas in the sense of “moral decay or corruption” ([an3.128:2.2]). According to the Mahāgovindasutta, it was Brahmā Sanaṅkumāra himself who taught that the real meaning of “putrescence” was the defilements such as anger ([dn19:46.15]). Thus Kassapa in the Āmagandhasutta, who is identified as a “kinsman of Brahmā”, is advocating the same position as Brahmā himself. But only the Āmagandhasutta connects the notions of “putrescence” and eating meat.

Before proceeding, let’s briefly review the position of the early texts on meat. It is accepted as normal throughout the Suttas and Vinaya that the Buddha and his community ate meat if they wished. Nonetheless, when the topic comes up it is usually hedged with cautions and restrictions. 

In the Jīvakasutta, the layman Jīvaka reports the rumor that the Buddha eats meat specially killed for him ([mn55]). The Buddha denies doing so, and repeats the well known Vinaya allowance that meat or fish may be eaten by a mendicant unless it is seen, heard, or suspected to have been killed on purpose for the mendicant. Normally a mendicant will simply accept whatever is placed in the bowl, and since they wander at random through a village, no-one is preparing food for them specially. The bulk of the Sutta shifts focus to the elevated practice of the four divine abidings and restraint by the mendicants, and analyzes in detail the ethical boundaries that are crossed by someone who kills an animal to offer the mendicants. From the moment they order the beast to be fetched for killing, they make bad kamma. Thus the emphasis of the Sutta as a whole is not to justify meat-eating but to establish the strict criteria under which meat-eating is permitted, and to graphically illustrate the evil of killing for food.

In the Vinaya itself, the threefold allowance is not the only word on meat-eating. A mendicant is forbidden from eating ten kinds of meat—human, elephant, horse, dog, snake, lion, tiger, leopard, bear, and hyena ([pli-tv-kd6:23.1.1] ff.). And given that it is not always obvious whether such meat is being served, it is an offence to eat any meat without first having checked that it is allowable ([pli-tv-kd6:23.9.9]). It’s also an offence to accept raw meat ([dn1:1.10.9]). Meat is regarded as one of the luxurious foods ([dn26:19.6]), asking for which is forbidden ([pli-tv-bu-vb-pc39:2.10.1]). Certain ascetics refused all meat ([dn25:8.5]); these included Nanda Vaccha, Kisa Saṅkicca, and Makkhali Gosāla ([mn36:5.3]). But when the Jains falsely accused the Buddha of eating meat slaughtered specially for him, the Buddha dismissed them ([an8.12:31.4]). It seems the early Jains, like the Buddhists, would accept meat that was not from an animal slaughtered specially for them. He likewise rejected Devadatta’s proposal that all mendicants must be vegetarian, along with a range of other ascetic practices, as it too was merely a pretense to attack the Buddha. Instead, he left the decision with individual mendicants ([pli-tv-kd17:3.14.13]). Other ascetics went to the opposite extreme, consuming only meat and alcohol, apparently blazing the trail for certain delusional teachers today ([dn24:1.11.4]). While the position of brahmins on meat is ambiguous, there is at least one passage where a brahmin laments his meat-eating as being unrighteous ([pli-tv-bu-vb-sk69:1.32]).

Thus the general position of the Suttas on meat-eating for mendicants is to restrict its usage and leave the final decision up to the individual. As for the lay folk, there are no special pronouncements as such. But it is considered wrong livelihood to trade in animals or in meat ([an5.177]). And of course it is wrong to kill or harm an animal under any circumstances, or to have one killed. Again, there is restriction without prohibition.

In this discussion, I have left the identity of “Kassapa” aside. It is a common name for brahmins. The Sutta is concluded with two verses which, according to the commentary, were added by the redactors at the Council. It’s an unusual ending, which suggests that a pre-existing set of verses was adapted for the context. Now, in these closing verses “Kassapa” is identified as a Buddha, who must be the legendary Buddha of the past of that name. Obviously such a legendary attribution cannot be taken literally, but rather is another sign of an imported text. Further, the main series of verses, which end with the tag line “this is putrescence, not eating meat”, deal only with general ethical matters and don’t have any distinctively Buddhist teachings. The last two verses of the teaching (before the closing verses) lack this ending tag. They say nothing of “putrescence”, but contain a Buddhist criticism of Brahmanical ideas of ritual purification. 

So the Suttas attribute the teaching on “putrescence” as moral decay to Brahmā. And the relevant portions of the Āmagandhasutta are purely a discussion between two brahmins, with all the Buddhist content added later. It seems to me, then, that the main teaching here is a Brahmanical dialogue that was adopted as a Buddhist text by adding some framing verses and a background story. Perhaps this explains why, while the position on meat-eating here does not technically contradict that found in the rest of the canon, it does have a more pushy vibe, lacking the tendency towards constraints that we find elsewhere. 

The puzzling thing in all this is the question of supply and demand. Economic theory tells us that demand for a certain good drives its production. If people buy more meat, suppliers will kill more animals. But the Suttas don’t think in terms of a generalized concept of economic demand for meat, only a personal and individual one. To us, this seems like such a natural and obvious argument, yet even the Buddha’s critics don’t make it. Why is that?

In pre-industrial societies, the supply of meat is relatively fixed. Chickens run around the yard, cows graze in a field, fish swim in a stream. A certain number of animals are killed for their flesh, but well-functioning societies do not over-cull and deplete their supply. But too many animals is also a problem, as they eat the crops. Typically, larger animals are killed for celebrations or special days, or when the supply becomes excessive and must be burned off. This is ritualized in the form of the sacrifice. In addition, there are no simple means to store large quantities of meat long-term, so animals are usually slaughtered and eaten right away. 

Thus the early texts employ the concept of “available meat” (_pavattamaṁsa_): it was either there or it wasn’t. The animals would be killed regardless, which is why it only becomes an ethical issue for the mendicants when animals are killed on purpose for them. There’s a good illustration of this in the Vinaya ([pli-tv-kd6:23.2.8]). The laywoman Suppiyā tried to order some meat, but there was none for sale in the city of Benares, since no slaughtering had been done that day. No meat in the entire city: unthinkable to us, but normal to them. 

There was no concept of increasing the supply of meat to cater for demand, because the material means of increasing supply simply did not exist. It is only in recent centuries, with the application of scientific and industrial techniques to animal husbandry, that we have learned to expand the supply of meat at will. Producing more meat takes energy, and that energy is supplied by fossil fuels. 

Arguably, the concept of “available meat” no longer applies, except in limited cases such as roadkill. All meat is produced on demand, even if that demand is indirect. When monastics accept meat, this acts as an implicit endorsement for the lay community, so that even those who were formerly vegetarian start eating meat. This contributes to expanding demand for meat in society as a whole.

This demand drives the machinery of death in the slaughterhouses, the grotesque horrors of the factory farms, the grim scouring of the oceans, and the ecocidal madness of climate collapse. Those who eat meat belong to the most privileged generation that has ever lived on this planet, blessed with an astonishing quantity and variety of delicious foods, yet they choose to demand the flesh of living creatures. It is certainly possible to argue that this is “allowed” in the ancient texts. But the economic, material, and social context has completely changed. Is this really the best we can do—to take what we want because we can get away with it?

### Conscience

The Hirisutta is named after its first word, but the theme is, rather, good friendship ([snp2.3]). Even though the poem has only five verses, it appears somewhat disjointed, as the final two verses seem disconnected from the first three. Perhaps it is simply a somewhat clumsy compilation. But I suspect the whole is more coherent than it appears.

The poem begins with a description of a bad friend, who betrays you or looks for flaws. It especially emphasizes that a good friend is one who acts for one’s benefit, not just talking. The third verse ends with a moving and intimate image: a true friend rests with you like a child lying on the breast.

It is the fourth verse that seems to break the pattern. The syntax is tricky, but I think the key is the word _porisa_. One is said to carry the “_porisa_” burden. This is explained in the commentary here as being “fit for a person (_purisa_)”. _Porisa_ is also used in the sense of a “servant”. I think the sense here is that one serves others by acting as a good friend for them. In doing such service—the virtues spoken of in the first three verses—one can expect a worldly happiness and praise. 

The final verse then brings in the twist: the benefits of even such virtuous and loving companionship pale in comparison to the blissful nectar of seclusion. It raises the virtue from the mundane to the transcendant, as do so many Dhamma verses.

### Blessings

The Maṅgalasutta redefines the superstitious notion of an “auspicous sign” (_maṅgala_) in practical and ethical terms (Maṅgalasutta, [snp2.4]). The prose background serves to authorize the new definition in the eyes of the gods, who, one might have suspected, knew what an auspcious sign really was. _Maṅgala_ shades in meaning from a prohetic aurgury (“auspice”) to a more general sense of “felicity” or “good fortune”.

People still seek to know the future by reading tea leaves or checking their horoscope. Such practices are an extremely widespread human phenomenon, not limited to one particular culture or religion. The Suttas mention countless such practices and dismiss them all. One who has seen the truth will not believe in such things ([an6.93]), but the Buddha was not harsh about this, as he did allow mendicants to step on a cloth as a _maṅgala_ as a concession to the superstitions of layfolk ([pli-tv-kd15:21.4.11]), even though he would not do so himself ([mn85:7.16]).

The “blessings” in the Maṅgalasutta are things that are both good in and of themselves, and which lead to a good outcome in the future. The sense of creating an auspicious future through auspicious deeds comes out more clearly in [an3.155], where a lucky star (_sunakkhatta_) and a good auspice (_sumaṅgala_) lead to happy results. In the Maṅgalasutta this is implicit in the sturcture of the text, which moves from the simple building-blocks of a good life to the sublime bliss of freedom.

It is in its recognition of the simple things that the Maṅgalasutta distinguishes itself. There are many Suttas that eulogize the virtues of renunciation, but few that speak of getting an education in a craft or skill, or which recognize the crucial importance of living in a region hospitable for practice.

The very first line of the Buddha’s response has a special significance for me. When I first read it, devouring all the Suttas as a newly-enthused meditator, it struck a discordant note. “Not to associate with fools”—isn’t that mean? And who gets to say who is a fool? Today, however, I think this is a crucial statement, and its placement at the start of a text that lays the foundation for a blessed life is no accident. If we become caught up in the words of fools—those who preach anger and division, who spin delusional conspiracies in the name of truth—then our minds become twisted, and any possibility of moral or spiritual progress is lost. All the more valuable are the compassionate and reasonable words of the Buddha.

### With Spiky, the Native Spirit

Unlike the _yakkhas_ we met previously, here Kharo (“Shaggy”) and Sūciloma (“Spiky”) are named not after places, but after their rather unkempt and intimidating coverings ([snp2.5]). But as with Āḷavaka, once the unpleasantries of the introduction were over, the questions are not merely civil, but positively sophisticated: “where do the mind’s thoughts originate, like a crow let loose by boys?”

The Buddha’s response is insightful and challenging. But at the end there is no word as to the _yakkhas_’ response, unlike the spirits of place who committed themselves to spreading the Dhamma in their region. The prose introduction, however, allows for a different kind of symbolic reading.

In the Hemavatasutta, the _yakkhas_ are discussing the observance of a sabbath day, and propose to see the Buddha. So this discourse can be read as a conversion narrative, where the Buddhist observance displaces an earlier animist observance in the mountainous regions. In the Āḷavakasutta, it is the Buddha who is intruding in Āḷavaka’s home at Āḷavī, just as Buddhism came into places that already had animist forms of worship. While there was initial discomfort, soon enough Āḷavaka was happy with the intrusion. 

The Sūcilomasutta, on the other hand, is set in the very heartland of Buddhism, at Gayā, close by the seat of the Buddha’s enlightenment. The Buddha is still sitting in the haunt of the _yakkha_—because even there, animism predates the Buddha—but it is the _yakkhas_ who pass close by the Buddha. They press up against him, just as the ancient animist practices pressed up against Buddhism even in its heartland; it was a prickly situation. The Buddhists saw the _yakkhas_—and by extension their worshippers—as coarse, verging on violent, and saw themselves as a civilizing and uplifting influence. They didn’t dismiss others because of their different practices, but saw in them a potential for growth.

### A Righteous Life

Like the Hirisutta, the Dhammacariyasutta is named after the first word. But it’s a bit misleading, because the bulk of the Sutta is about unrighteous conduct, and only the beginning and the end return to good conduct. The commentarial title Kapilasutta is spurious, as there is no mention of a Kapila in the text. 

The mission statement of this text is in the first two verses: if someone goes forth as a mendicant but is of bad character and conduct, things only get worse for them. Monastic life is no magical cure for depravity. And indeed, for one who presents themselves to the world as a paragon of virtue, the consequences of bad behavior are even worse.

The poem denounces those of bad conduct and urges the Saṅgha to expell wicked mendicants, as the Buddha did also at [an8.10] and [an8.20]. There are several legal mechanisms in the Vinaya for such matters. 

One interesting detail worth noting: the Buddha does not do the expulsion himself. He built the Saṅgha to take responsibility for its own actions. And just as it is up to the Saṅgha to decide who to accept in their ranks, it is up to them to decide who to expel. 

### Brahmanical Traditions

Asked by some senior brahmins about the ancient brahmanical ways, the Buddha laments that brahmins have fallen far from their pure ancient traditions ([snp2.7]). The nadir was the ritual slaughter of cows, a vile practice that was specifically called for by the brahmins themselves against the outraged cries of the gods. 

The notion that contemporary brahmins had fallen into corruption is found elswehere in the Suttas. The Soṇasutta speaks of five ancient brahmanical practices that today are only followed by dogs, not by brahmins ([an5.191]); all five are also in the Brāhmaṇadhammikasutta. If this feels too harsh, the Chāndogyopaniṣad includes the famous “prayer of the dogs”, where brahmins are compared to dogs begging for food  (ChU 1.12).

The Buddha depicts ancient brahmins as having been renunciant seers devoted to austerity and meditation. This generally accords with the description in the Aggaññasutta ([dn27:22.6]), although not every detail is the same. There, they are said to have gone to the village for alms, whereas here food was left outside their doors; there, taking up recitation was felt to be a decline from meditation, whereas here their devotion to chanting is praised. Nonetheless, the overall tenor is that the brahmins lived then much like the bhikkhus do today.

The text is full of fascinating details, and while the overarching message is clear, it is not easy to know how to read it. What exactly is the source of the Buddha’s information? It’s tempting so simply attribute the knowledge to the Buddha’s psychic powers. But the text itself says nothing of this, and, as a rule of thumb, it’s better to prefer the lesser miracle. 

Might the depiction be simply a legend or parable, a just-so story invented by the Buddhists to show their superiority to the brahmins? There’s no doubt that there is something to this; obviously it is from a Buddhist point of view. The lives and values of the ancient brahmins are markedly similar to the mendicants who followed the Buddha, and the text certainly serves to exalt that way of life. The oldest Brahmanical text, the Rig Veda, is not a renunciate text; it glorifies the gods for the sake of worldly prosperity. We know that an ascetic tradition emerged within Brahmanism, but it’s a stretch to argue that this was the normal and accepted practice among ancient brahmins. There is a world of difference, however, between selecting details to tell a story, and simply making things up. 

Does the text perhaps reflect things that the Buddha had seen and heard around him, things said by brahmins, or about them? There are many things that are lost to us—as they were even to brahmins of the Buddha’s day. Possibly, although if it were common knowledge, you’d expect that the brahmins would not have to ask the Buddha about it.

There is at least one detail that suggests the text is, in fact, drawing on specific Brahmanical sources. The text refers to a period of 48 years of the “spiritual life”. Some manuscripts add _komara_ (“boy”) here; but this is hypermetrical, and must have been copied over from [an5.192:5.4], which says this was a period for learning the “hymns”, i.e. the Vedas. Clearly this refers to an apprenticeship under a teacher from the time of childhood to master the Vedic texts. The Suttas speak of boys as young as sixteen as having achieved such mastery. 

The practice of _brahmacariya_ is not common in pre-Buddhist texts; it’s referred to only once in a late Rig Vedic verse (RV 10,109.05), and occasionally in the Chandogya Upaniṣad (ChUp 2.23.1), where it appears as one of the ways to attain a heavenly rebirth. 

A more promising connection is found in the old Brahmanical law books. Like all ancient Indian texts, the date of these is uncertain, but they are not too far from the Pali canon. In the Baudhāyanadharmasūtra we find the same concept of _brahmacariya_ that is described in the Brāhmaṇadhammikasutta. 

>_aṣṭācatvāriṃśad varṣāṇi paurāṇaṃ vedabrahmacaryam_    
>For the ancients, the studentship for learning the Vedas lasted forty-eight years.

Likewise, the Āpastambadharmasūtra attributes to “some” (_eke_) the same period (Ap1.11.30.2: _tathā vratena-aṣṭācatvāriṃśat parīmāṇena_). The similarity is too pronounced to be a coincidence: both Buddhist and Brahmanical sources speak of a period of forty-eight years for studying Vedic mantras, and this is ascribed in both cases to the ancient brahmins. At least in some details, then, the Brāhmaṇadhammikasutta must be drawing upon genuine Brahmanical traditions.

I wondered whether these texts would reflect other aspects of the Brāhmaṇadhammikasutta. As I’m no student of the Brahmanical texts, I’m not in a position to assess all the different traditions of Brahmanism, but perhaps a simple survey restricted to the Baudhāyanadharmasūtra might help answer our question. Let us go through the first portion of the text and see how the ideals of brahmin as described in the Brāhmaṇadhammikasutta and Baudhāyanadharmasūtra compare.

A brahmin should be restrained ([snp2.7:2.1]: _saññatattā_; Baudh 1.5.10.31: _saṁyata ātmā_) and austere ([snp2.7:2.1]: _tapassino_; Baudh 1.5.10.33: _tapasvī_). They owned no cattle, ([snp2.7:3.1]: _na pasū brāhmaṇānāsuṁ_; Baudh 1.10.18.4: _viṭsvadhyayana-yajanadāna-kṛṣi-vāṇijya-paśupālana_) for their true wealth was in recitation, which was a gift from Brahmā ([snp2.7:3.2]: _sajjhāyadhanadhaññāsuṁ brahmaṁ nidhimapālayuṁ_; [Baudh 1.10.18.2] _brahma vai svaṃ mahimānaṃ brāhmaṇeṣv adadhādadhyayana_). They lived a mendicant lifestyle (Baudh 1.2.3.16, Baudh 2.10.18.4, Baudh 2.10.18.22: _bhaikṣa-arthī grāmam anvicchet_), accepting food freely donated by others ([snp2.7:4]; Baudh 2.10.18.12: _ayācitam asaṁkḷptam_). Despite their asceticism, and in a quite un-bhikkhu-like touch, they wore multi-colored robes ([snp2.7:5.1]: _nānārattehi vatthehi_; Baudh 1.6.13.9: _citra-vāsasaś citra-āsaṅgāvṛṣākapāv_).

When married, a brahmin only approached his wife for sex during the fertile fortnight of her period ([snp2.7:9]: _aññatra tamhā samayā utuveramaṇiṁ pati antarā methunaṁ dhammaṁ nāssu gacchanti_; Baudh 4.1.19: _ṛtau na upaiti yo bhāryām anṛtau yaś ca gacchati_). An interesting difference is that for the Brahmanical text, it is an equal offence to have sex outside the fertile period, and also to *not* have sex in the fertile period. The Buddha adopts the former detail, but not the latter: Buddhism is not a fertility religion. It’s also noteworthy that for the Brāhmaṇadhammikasutta, marriage is purely a love-match entered with mutual consent; I haven’t been able to identify this concept in the Brahmanical text ([snp2.7:9]). 

The central value of the Brāhmaṇadhammikasutta, the one whose loss precipitated the fall of the brahmins, was harmlessness ([snp2.7:10.3]: _avihiṁsa_). And harmlessness is constantly listed as a central virtue in the Baudhāyanadharmasūtra. The Self is purified by harmlessness to living creatures as the mind is purifed by truth  (Baudh 1.5.8.2: _ahiṃsayā ca bhūtātmā manaḥ satyena śudhyati_). The brahmin has vows of harmlessness, truth, not stealing, sexual restraint, and generosity (Baudh 2.10.18.2). “Austerity” (_tapas_) is defined as beginning with harmlessness (Baudh 3.10.13). An ascetic forest dweller is urged to not harm even gadfiles or gnats (Baudh 3.3.19: _na druhyed daṃśa.maśakān himavāṃs tāpaso bhavet_). 

If one reads the Brāhmaṇadhammikasutta with the commentary, however, there are a couple of details that are a little puzzling, as they appear to endorse the caste doctrine. If this was the case, it would suggest that the text had been rather carelessly put together from Brahmanical sources, in contrast to the careful selection of details we have seen above. According to the commentary, the ancient brahmins are praised for only marrying within their caste ([snp2.7:8.1]), and a cause of their decline was the rejection of the doctrine of caste ([snp2.7:33.4]). Bhikkhu Bodhi, whose translations for the most part stays close to the commentary, remarks in his summary of this sutta that “There seems to be here an incongruity between this line of the text and the view expressed elsewhere that caste distinctions are purely conventional.” However a closer reading shows that neither of these phrases require reading in this sense. 

[snp2.7:8.1] says _Na brāhmaṇā aññamagamuṁ_, literally “brahmins did not go (for sex) to another”. Compare Baudh 2.1.2.13, which says there are certain women who are “not to be approached” (_agamyā-gamanaṁ_). This includes women who are to be shunned (_apapātrāṁ_, “those who eat from separate bowls”). This is a stronger term than merely “of a different caste”, and refers to those who have committed a transgression serious enough for them to be set apart. Indeed, the Baudhāyanadharmasūtra praises a brahmin who honors all four castes with offerings of food in his home (Baudh 2.3.5.11). Similar is the _patitā_, a woman who has “fallen” from caste. Obviously notions of caste are involved here, but it is not as simple as saying that a brahmin can never have sex outside of caste; the text is more specific and restricted. Compare what it says about having children, where the requirement to remain within one’s own caste is clear and emphatic (Baudh 2.9.16.3: _prajām utpādayed yuktaḥ sve sve varṇe_). 

But caste is not the only criterion. The passage also forbids a brahmin from relations with female friend of a teacher. Interestingly, the text refers without comment to both male and female teachers (_gurvī_). Thus the basic idea is about setting boundaries around appropriate relations. The Buddhist text speaks of the same idea, but pointedly does *not* frame it in terms of caste.

And as to the second problematic passage, _jātivāda_ in the Suttas doesn’t quite mean “doctrine of caste”. Rather, it refers to one’s own ancestral lineage. So it doesn’t mean that they became corrupt because they rejected the doctrine of caste; rather, it is because they neglected their ancestral heritage. This reinforces the central message of the Sutta, and it doesn’t require an odd apparent endorsement of caste.

In sum, there seems no doubt that the Brāhmaṇadhammikasutta is drawing upon genuine Brahmancial traditions, which have much in common with the Baudhāyanadharmasūtra. The Baudhāyanadharmasūtra itself, of course, does not claim to be a fresh invention, but to draw on the ancient traditions of, in order, the Vedas, the ancillary literature, and the traditions of disciples (Baudh 1.1.1.1–4). Thus both texts position themselves as descriptions of the noble practices of the brahmins of old. Law books of any kind don’t depict what people actually do, but what the law-makers think they *should* do. The Brāhmaṇadhammikasutta carefully selects details that accord with the story it wants to tell, rather than presenting the traditions in whole. But it does not merely create an idealized brahmin by projecting the ideal of a mendicant into the past, for it includes many details that do not apply to bhikkhus, such as colored robes and family life.

Now, at some point these ancient paragons of Brahmanical virtue arranged for harmless sacrifices. The Brahmanical tradition includes many sacrifices that do not involve killing, such as the _agnihotra_, where ghee is offered to the fire. This tradition harks back to ancient Indo-Aryan rites, and related rituals are maintained among inheritors of the ancient Indo-Aryan religions from Iran to Lithuania. It may well stem from much earlier, and be related to the taming of fire itself. So there is definietly support for the idea that ancient Brahmins practiced harmless rites. 

This doesn’t mean, however, that they did not also practice the harmful rituals of animal sacrifice. Such practices also hark from human antiquity, and are deeply embedded in Vedic beliefs and texts. The Brāhmaṇadhammikasutta, however, insists that there was no sacrifice of cows. It speaks tenderly of the loving debt owed to cows. The ancient Indo-Aryans were pastoralists, and the cow was central to their lifestyle. The Vedas treat cows with respect, calling them _aghnya_ “not to be killed”. We find in the Rig Veda verses of gratitude and sympathy with the cow that are not at all dissimilar to the sentiments of the Brāhmaṇadhammikasutta (Rig Veda 1.164.40, Wilson translation).

>Cow, may you be rich in milk through abundant fodder; that we also may be rich (in abundance); eat grass at all seasons, and, roaming (at will), drink pure water.

But this does not tell the whole picture. In the Rig Veda, Indra devours the offering of oxen (_ukṣan_), even fifteen or twenty, filling himself on their fat (RV 10.86.13–4). He eats bulls (_vṛṣa̱bha_) cooked for him (RV 10.27.2, RV 10.28.3), and buffaloes (_mahiṣa_) in their hundreds (RV 6.17.11, RV 5.29.7, RV 8.12.8). Agni is called “one whose food is the ox and the cow (_vaśā_)” (RV 8.43.11). A cow was to be slaughtered for the wedding (RV 10.85.13). That the sacrifice and eating of cows did not fall out of favor after the Vedic period is shown by sych ritual texts as the Taittirīya Brāhmaṇa, which emphasizes that the cow (_go_) was a sacrifice and was food (TaittB 3.9.8), the Aitareya Brāhmaṇa, which prescribes the killing of a cow to feed a guest (AitB 3.4), and the Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad, which recommends eating beef (_rṣabha_) to help procure a son (BrhUp 6.4.18). All this agrees with the Pali canon, where a “cow-butcher” (_goghātaka_) is frequently mentioned, and is a common enough livelihood to have regular apprentices (_goghātakantevāsī_).

That the historical picture is complex should come as no surprise: the Brahmanical tradition is compiled of a vast number of texts produced over vast extents of space and time. Regardless, the Brāhmaṇadhammikasutta is emphatic that ancient Brahmanical customs required purely harmless rites. Gradually, however, the prosperity of the Brahmins caused corruption to seep into them, jealous of the finery of the kings and their ladies. 

Among the glories of the kings is their planned urban environment: their homes were neatly laid out in rows ([snp2.7:18.4]). This is a stock phrase that in the Suttas describes Hell ([mn129:16.4], [mn130:16.4], [an3.36:16.2]), and elsewhere an ideal vision of a city revealed in a magic gem ([ja541:101.4])—an ambiguity that might seem strange unless you’ve lived in the suburbs. But there is one passage where this describes an actual city: the Mahājanaka Jātaka ([ja539:25.2]). 

This tells of the Great Janaka, the wise and wealthy king of Mithila, capital of Videha. He returned from exile to win the hand of the princess, his cousin Sīvali, and the crown of the glorious city. Eventually, however, he saw through the danger of such pleasures and determined to go forth. He saw even his own home as being like one of the hells—thus showing that the description of hell as being like an ordered city is no accident. Donning the ochre robe and bowl and taking up a mendicant’s duty, he left, aspiring for _jhāna_, and in the Himalayas met a Brahmanical ascetic named Nārada of the Kassapa clan. 

The point here is that Mithila is an actual city, and “Janaka” an actual king, or more accurately, a kingly lineage. A historical Janaka of Mithila was the royal sponsor of Yājñavalkya. For his skill in debate he presented Yājñavalkya with vast wealth—herds of cattle with gold-tipped horns—despite the fact that Yājñavalkya claimed to be a renunciant. Yājñavalkya is the putative author of many Brahmanical scriptures, and the corrupt brahmins are said to have compiled scriptures. 

As to what scriptures were compiled or composed, they cannot be the Vedas, as the Suttas, like the brahmins themselves, regarded the Vedas as descending from an immemorial past. So they must be the post-Vedic scriptures, most likely the Brahmaṇas, which are a class of texts that, among other things, detail the sacrifices and the fees payable to brahmins therefrom. The oldest of these is the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, of which the final portion is the Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad, and the whole of which is attributed to Yājñavalkya. It prescribeds fees for rites such as human sacrifice (ŚpB 13.6.2.18), horse sacrifice (ŚpB 13.5.4.24), and universal sacrifice (ŚpB 13.7.1.13). Fees would include women (ŚpB 13.5.4.27), gold (ŚpB 13.4.1.13), silver (ŚpB 13.4.2.10), cattle (ŚpB 13.5.4.7), oxen and furniture (ŚpB 13.8.4.10). The brahmins are depicted as sharing the wealth of the sacrifice that they gain (ŚpB 13.5.4.15). 

It’s no great stretch to imagine that the Brāhmaṇadhammikasutta is thinking of the kingdom of Mithila, and the corrupting influence of the lavish sponsorship of brahmins under the Janakas. Of course, it is not explicitly set in that period, but rather in the legendary days of King Okkāka (Sanskrit: _Ikṣvāku_). He was the founder of the Solar lineage of kings, and is claimed to be a distant ancestor by the Buddha. He does not appear to be a historical figure, however, and may be a personified culture hero associated with the cultivation of sugar-cane (_ikṣuḥ_).

Eventually, the corruption reached such an extent that the brahmins demanded the ultimate sin: the slaughter of cows for sacrifice. At that, all the gods cried out with one voice: “this is a crime against nature!” (_adhammo_). The intervention of the gods against the sacrifice is a common theme in religious evolution. Sacrifice lurks in the past, and a tale is told of how god intervenes to reduce or eliminate the harm: think of the gods led by Zeus revolted at being served human flesh by Tantalus, or how Jehovah stopped Abraham from killing his son Isaac, accepting a ram instead. In the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, an anonymous voice intervenes to advise against human sacrifice (ŚpB 13.6.2.13).

Once the endorsement of the gods was severed due to this unnatural violence, humanity became sickly and divided, the social order fell into decay, and we ended up with the troubled world of today.

### The Boat

The Nāvasutta, or as is also known, the Dhammasutta (“Discourse on the Teaching”) is a short eulogy of the blessings of a good teacher ([snp2.8]). It kicks off the remainder of the chapter, which offers a loosely organized progression on the virtues of a good teacher as the foundation for monastic life.

The Nāvasutta employs the well-known simile of the raft from [mn22:24]. There, a man cobbles together a raft from grass and twigs and makes his way across the river safely, abandoning the raft on the far side. Here, one in a strong boat can bring across not only themselves, but many others.

The image occurs elsewhere, such as the Kāmasutta ([snp4.1:6]), but so far as I know this is the only place where the boat is envisaged as having room for more than one. In the “Questions of Dhotaka”, the Buddha denies that he can release anyone else, and instead says that the practitioner can themselves cross the flood through living mindfully ([snp5.6:4]). Probably it is no more than a metaphor slightly stretched, but the idea that one’s own efforts brings others across seems more at home in later forms of Buddhism.

The thrust of the text, however, is simply that it is good to use discernment when selecting a spiritual teacher. For as inspiring and helpful as a good teacher is, a bad teacher only passes on confusion and doubt.

### What Morality?

Named after the question in the opening line, the Kiṁsīlasutta seems to build on the previous; once a teacher is chosen, a student will honor them by applying their teaching in practice  ([snp2.9]).

The Sutta begins with the proper attitude that a student should display to a teacher, respecting the teacher and treasuring the rare chance to learn Dhamma. The emphasis is on the subjective side of learning; without joy, eagerness, and humility, the path of learning is rocky indeed.

But learning is not for its own sake, for its essence is understanding; and the essence of understanding is the meditative immersion of the mind in _samādhi_.

### Get Up!

Again, as if continuing the theme of the former, the Uṭṭhānasutta urges the meditator to remember that _samādhi_ doesn’t just happen, it arises through diligent meditation ([snp2.10]). Many a well-meaning meditator has started with all good intentions, only to flag along the way. This is especially a trap in monastic life, where it is all too easy to slip into complacency. Hence teachings very much like this are often a staple in meditation communities.

### With Rāhula 

The Buddha’s son Rāhula appears several times in the Suttas, and here we find a brief but complete survey of the monastic training, beginning once more with the honor owed to a teacher ([snp2.11]).

The voice of the first two verses is not entirely clear from the text. The commentary explains that the first verse was a question asked by the Buddha to Rāhula, concerning Rāhula’s regular teacher, Venerable Sāriputta. The Buddha wants to know if his son has become over-familiar to the point of losing respect for his expert teacher (_paṇḍita_), but Rāhula says he bears him nothing but respect. The teacher is said to “hold aloft the torch for all humanity?” (_ukkādhāro manussānaṁ_). In this case, the commentary seems plausible, for  _ukkādhāra_ appears also in [iti104:2.9] where it applies to all accomplished mendicants. Sāriputta in particular is the one who keeps the Wheel of Dhamma rolling (eg. [snp3.7:22.1]); in other words, the one who brings the Dhamma to the people. So the image of him bearing a torch for humanity seems apt. 

The remainder of the Sutta is a concise summary of the monastic path otherwise known as the “gradual training”: the aspiration to end suffering; restraint and good friendship; moderation in material requisites; mindfulness and restraint; meditation on the ugliness of the body; culminating with abandoning conceit.

### Vaṅgīsa and his Mentor Nigrodhakappa

The Nigrodhakappasutta is a series of elaborate verses by the monk Vaṅgīsa, whose mentor, Nigrodhakappa, has recently passed ([snp2.12]). Vaṅgīsa asks the Buddha whether Nigrodhakappa was fully enlightened. Vaṅgīsa was an accomplished poet, whose skill in extemporaneous verse was praised by the Buddha ([an1.212]). The quality of _paṭibhāna_ is regarded as an asepect of wisdom; it refers to the spontaneous arising of a wise and eloquent expression of the Dhamma. 

Ancient Indian literary culture is confounding to Western sensibilities, accustomed as we are to think of “literature” and “writing” as going hand in hand. In ancient India, a supremely sophisticated literary culture—with advanced linguistics, philosophy, and poetics—was created and maintained entirely through the oral tradition. Throughout the Suttas we see poetry spontaneously improvised. Vaṅgīsa’s style shows that such improvisations could reach a high degree of embellishment and sophistication.

The verses are full of wordplay, with unusual forms and vocabulary that are a delightful challenge to convey in translation. Consider just a single line:

>*khippaṁ giraṁ eraya vaggu vagguṁ*    
Swiftly send forth your graceful voice

_Girā_ is a poetic term for a song or a saying. It is followed by  _eraya_, which is a unique form in the Pali canon: a stem imperative from the rare _erayati_, to raise the voice. This leads onto the punctuation of  _vaggu vagguṁ_, a reduplication of a word whose meaning is exactly how it sounds: sweet-sounding (cp. English “melody”). It can be read either as an emphatic reduplication “sweet sweet voice”, or with the first element as a vocative “sweet one, send forth your sweet voice”; I read it in the first sense.

Notice that the first pair of words and the last pair of words sonically echo each other. In each case we have a pair of two-syllable words, which are consonant-heavy, with the emphasis on gutterals. The vowels are short, and are repeated in each pair: _i_ + _a_, then _a_ + _u_. So we have a pair of chiming words to bookend the line with a solid rhythmic punctuation. They are joined together with the fluid _eraya_, which entirely lacks gutteral, or indeed any plosive consonants. It’s a musical line, its percussive chimes united with fluid melody.

Vaṅgīsa’s sophistication is not just in sounds; he loves to play with meanings as well. Consider these enigmatic lines:

>_Na kāmakāro hi puthujjanānaṁ,_    
_Saṅkheyyakāro ca tathāgatānaṁ._

The suffix _-kāra_ usually means “maker”, and _kāmakāro_ appears in [cp16:11.4] and [ja524:26.3] as “wish-granter”, “fulfiller of desire”, while _issariyakāmakārikā_ at [kv23.3:1.1] means “the will of God”, and at [pe6:73.2], _akāmakāri_ is given as a meaning of “not-self”. The point here is that in the sphere of worldly desires, it is not possible to simply get what you want. Vaṅgīsa invents the term _saṅkheyyakāra_ in contrast. _Saṅkhā_ means “calculation, reckoning” and _saṅkheyya_ means “calculable”. The Buddhas have a gift for explaining things in a way that makes their meaning clear. Unlike the illusory wish-granter imagined by ordinary folk, this is real.

For all the poetic ingenuity on display, Vaṅgīsa’s question is a simple one: was his teacher Nigrodhakappa enlightened? The Buddha’s response is almost comical in its brevity, underscoring the restraint and directness of his rhetoric compared to Vaṅgīsa’s. Rarely in the Suttas do we see such a stark contrast in personal styles. He affirms Vaṅgīsa’s hopes in just three lines, within which he makes room for a powerful simile of his own: Nigrodhakappa cut off craving like a “river of darkness”.

### The Right Way to Wander 

In the Sammāparibbājanīyasutta, an unnamed party asks the Buddha about the proper way for a mendicant to wander the world ([snp2.13]). This expands on the Rāhulasutta, detailing the life of an ascetic. Instead of the emphasis on the teacher that we have seen in several Suttas of this chapter, we see a return to the solitary wandering life extolled in the Rhincoceros Horn and elsewhere.

In the first line we see the Buddha rejecting _maṅgalā_, which here we might render as “superstitions”. Here, rather than being co-opted to a Buddhist meaning as in the Maṅgalasutta, they are outright rejected. This sets the tone of the Sutta, which is less conciliatory and more a direct address to advanced practitioners. 

Each verse outlines a specific quality with which the mendicant wanders the world. There is no specific mention of meditation, or indeed, of any of the practices that a mendicant should pursue. Rather, the focus is on the inner qualities of freedom.

### With Dhammika 

The Dhammikasutta presents us with something of a puzzle, for it is initiated by the layman Dhammika who, despite his prominent position as leader of a large retinue, is mentioned nowhere else ([snp2.14]). He asks a straightfoward question: what is the practice both that for mendicants as well as for lay folk? But he proceeds to dress his question up; not, like Vaṅgīsa, with literary embellishment, but with praise for the Buddha, and reference to a number of previous occasions when he had persuaded difficult audiences.

He specifically references the dragon king Eravaṇa, who is recorded as encountering the Buddha on only one occasion, told in the Mahāsamayasutta [dn20:11.7]. The next verse mentions the Great King Vessavaṇa; and while he is a staple of Buddhist cosmology, he is here identified with Kuvera, which must be a reference to the Āṭānāṭiyasutta [dn32:7.40]. Thus these verses show a familiarity with these Suttas, and by referencing them Dhammika assumes his audience is also familiar. But these are two of the latest Suttas in the Dīghanikāya, showing an interest in magical protection that is rare in the canon. 

Compounding the puzzle is the fact that when the Buddha begins, he addresses the mendicants rather than Dhammika. In fact, the layman Dhammika only exists as a single mention in the opening setting. Given that his name simply means “follower of Dhamma”, that he occurs nowhere else, that he is familiar with late Suttas, and that both question and answer frequently reference _dhamma_, one might be forgiven for thinking that Dhammika is no more than a literary invention. Indeed, if we skip forward to the final verse, it urges a layperson to undertake a legitimate (_dhammika_) business. Perhaps the Sutta was originally named after this, and the introduction was supplied later.

Nonetheless, the text is a handy source for comparing the ethical injunctions for lay and renunciate communities. 

For renunciates, the basic precepts such as non-violence are skipped over—apparently they are assumed—and we begin with monastic deportment while on almsround in the village. Retreat, restraint in speech, and contentment with requistes round out the basic elements of monastic conduct, but there is no mention of meditation.

For layfolk, the emphasis is on the fundamental precepts beginning with not killing, with a special emphasis on not drinking. 

There’s an odd disjunct, as after teaching the five precepts, the text once again introduces the basic precepts ([snp2.14:26]–7), this time as the eight precepts. If this seems like an interpolated passage, it is, as it is also found several times in the Aṅguttaranikāya.

Following the Sabbath the lay follower should make an offering to the Sangha. The specific practice of offering to the Sangha the day after the Sabbath is only mentioned here. The impression that this is a late verse is reinforced by the fact that some of the terms, such as _pasannamānasa_, are found only in later texts. 

The last verse swerves again to mentioning the virtues of respect for parents and lawful business practices. As a result, the diligent lay person can expect to become one of the gods called “Self-luminous”. 

All this is suggestive of a later text, perhaps compiled in the Ashokan era, with its focus on the basics of ethics and the goal of heaven. Nonetheless, the ideals and practices taught here, as well as the direct and pragmatic style, remain well within the scope of early Buddhism.

## The Great Chapter

The middle chapter of the Suttanipāta opens with a distinct change of mood, from the fundamentals of ethics to the life of the Buddha. In contrast with the central position of the Buddha’s life in later teachings, the early Suttas contain relatively few accounts of the Buddha’s early life, making the few that exist of even greater interest. The Pabbajjāsutta ([snp3.1]) and the Padhānasutta that follows ([snp3.2]) are the root sources for several details that featured in later legends of the Buddha’s practice and awakening. Other Suttas in this chapter also touch on major events in the Buddha’s life—Kokālika ([snp3.10]; he was a follower of Devadatta) and the blessing of the newborn Siddhattha ([snp3.12]). Still others have a devotional flavor, while the Dvayatānupassanāsutta offers a unique perspective on core doctrines such as dependent origination ([snp3.12]). 

### Going Forth 

The Pabbajjāsutta recounts an episode evidentally from shortly after Siddhattha had gone forth, when he met Bimbisāra, the king of Magadha, for the first time. The king was deeply impressed by Siddhattha’s bearing and made an extravagent offer to him. Unusually, we have two other complete Indic versions of the Pabbajjāsutta, one in the Mahāsanghika Lokuttaravādin Mahastu in Hybrid Sanskrit, one in the Saṅghabhedavastu, a chapter of the Mūlasarvāstāda Vinaya, in Sanskrit. 

I feel that these Suttas represent a lost potential, a way that was not chosen. Their style is direct, charming, and effective. They have a dramatic flair that accentuates the personal, which makes them affecting in a way that the more elaborate legends have lost sight of. In piling up miracles and smoothing out the rough, later legends buried the Buddha’s humanity, like a movie smothered with too many effects. They aim to impress and overwhelm, but end up oppressive and tacky.

The bulk of the text is taken up with a narrative introduction in verse, the speaker of which is not specified in the text. Unusually, it is voiced in the first person (“I shall extol …”). The commentary identifies the speaker as Venerable Ānanda, and it is certainly the case that, in addition to his role in reciting all the Discourses, Ānanda was instrumental in creating the biography of the Buddha. It’s a striking and unique opening for a Sutta. 

The first three verses, including this opening, are missing from the parallel in the Mahāvastu, which otherwise appears quite early. However they are found in the Saṅghabhedavastu, which stems from a school (Mūlasarvāstivāda) that spilt from the Theravāda later than the split with the mahāsaṅghika Lokuttaravādins who compiled the Mahāvastu. Perhaps these verses were added subsequent to the first schism, which would place them after the time of Ashoka. This is very tentative, though, as the Mahāvastu presents the verses as part of a narrative flow, and might have left the opening verses out to avoid introducing a new narrative voice. 

The Pali commentary sets this encounter shortly after the Buddha’s renunciation, before his practice under the Brahmanical teachers Āḷāra Kālāma and Uddaka Rāmaputta. In this, the Saṅghabhedavastu agrees, but the Mahāvastu places the event between these two apprenticeships. 

There are a number of details that speak to the relative earliness of this text compared to the bulk of biographical legends.

- In the Pali, the Buddha is referred to as _buddha_, not _bodhisatta_, even though he is still not enlightened, suggesting that the doctrinal distinction between _buddha_ and _bodhisatta_ was not yet established. However, note that this is found *only* in the Pali, and the two Sanskrit versions do not say _buddha_.
- The Buddha is called _bhikkhu_.
- The Buddha feels the need to explain to Bimbisāra where the land of the Sakyans is.
- The Buddha acknowledged that his land was subject to Kosala and was not an independent kingdom.
- Bimbisāra goes to see him in a single chariot, apparently alone; compare the elaborate visit by his son Ajātasattu in [dn2]. The expected retinue is added in the Mahāvastu.
- The style is plain and draws on idioms found in the early texts.
- The text ends abruptly and is not concerned with Bimbisāra’s response.

A possible exception to the naturalism of the narrative is the mention that Bimbisāra saw the Buddha’s “marks” (_lakkhaṇa_), which may refer to the putative Brahmanical legend of the 32 marks of the great man. But this is not specified, and most of the marks, if they were genuine physical characteristics, would not really be visible on the street from a rooftop. More likely Bimbisāra simply saw that he bore himself well, with a mindful and dignified carriage. This impression is reinforced in the Sanskrit versions, both of which depict Bimbisāra himself as speaking of the marks, rather than saying that he saw them. The 32 marks of the great man are an obscure element of Brahmanical lore, and there is no reason why Bimbisāra should know or care about them.

On the other hand, there are a number of indications that suggest a degree of artifice in the account. Bimbisāra himself, while firmly esconsed in Buddhist lore, is an enigmatic figure in the early texts. He is mentioned fairly often, but usually in his absence. He is more like an idealized Buddhist king than a human personality like his counterpart Pasenadi of Kosala, or even his son, Ajātasattu. Given that Bimbisāra’s kingdom of Magadha ultimately triumphed and, within a century, dominated the entire region, it would make sense for the Buddhists to treat him as their own. We know that the Buddhist King Ashoka, the most magnificent heir to the Magadhan throne, was ecumenical in his own words and deeds, yet came to be depicetd in Buddhist texts as highly partisan. It’s possible that with Bimbisāra, too, his Buddhist sympathies were exaggerated in later legend. It should come as no surprise that the Jains, also, claim Bimbisāra as one of their own. Most likely he supported all the religions in his realm, as was the custom. 

Regardless of his own personal faith, however, there is nothing unusual in the idea of a king seeking out a dignified ascetic or wandering sage. The final verses of Bimbisāra, however, seem quite extraordinary under some readings ([snp3.1:16]–17). The lines are ambiguous; if we keep the sense of each verse contained within the verse, it seems Bimbisāra first praised the Bodhisatta’s dignified appearance, then offered him wealth and glory at the head of an army. This is how the verses are interpreted by the commentary, followed by Bhikkhu Bodhi. But no king in his right mind would promise an army to a stranger, let alone to a dedicated renunciant. If we ignore the verse boundaries, however, the description of the aristocrat naturally agrees with him riding in an army. Then, having praised the Bodhisatta’s appearance, Bimbisāra offers him “pleasures” (_bhoga_). This reading is adopted by K.R. Norman. It is still an inappropriate gift for a renunciant, but not nearly as outrageous. It is exactly the kind of thing a then-young king might do; on the one hand, out of a genuine desire to serve, and on the other, as a test. It is, in fact, exactly the same test that Devadatta failed when he became corrupted by the riches offered by Bimbisāra’s troubled son Ajātasattu.

The Sanskrit versions are quite different at this point, which is usually a sign that the lines were difficult even for the ancients. The Saṅghabhedavastu says that the mendicant life is no good for one such as the Bodhisatta, and he offers pleasures such as dwellings and women. The Mahāvastu compresses the passage, and has a reading that the translator Jones describes as “untranslateable”. 

This is a good example of what I call “the principle of least meaning”. Texts, and especially sacred scriptures, tend to become overburdened with meaning and interpretation. When translating, always choose the *thinnest* reading possible, the one that adds the least meaning to the passage. In this case, to offer food and enjoyments to a renunciant is an everyday thing, but to offer an army is astonishing and unprecedented. Unless the text requires it, prefer the lesser meaning. 

The outcome was never in doubt. If the Bodhisatta had succumbed to temptation, he would never have become the Buddha and we would not hear his story. But this was not the final temptation he was to face. He politely rejects Bimbisāra’s offer and commits to “striving”.

### Striving

The Padhānasutta picks up the story some time later, when the Bodhisatta was meditating on the banks of the Nerañjara river ([snp3.2]). He is confronted by Māra and his ten armies, and responds with a bold and confident assertion of his future enlightenment. The title word _padhāna_ means both “striving, putting forth energy”, and also the active application of energy in practice, and thus comes close in meaning to “meditation”; a _padhānasāla_ is a “meditation hall”. Like the Pabbajjāsutta, we have two almost complete parallels in Indic languages, in the Mahāvastu again, and in the Lalitavisatra, a popular legend of the Buddha in Sanskrit; while it is a later text, this passage is mostly verbatim. 

The chronology of these episodes is not entirely clear. According to the commentary, this Sutta depicts the time the Bodhisatta was engaged in the practice of severe, Jain-like austerities. Māra says he is thin, discolored, and near death, which is how he is described in the prose accounts of this period of “striving” ([mn36:26.1]). It was immediately after this encounter that he realized the futility of such practice and undertook the gentler path of _jhāna_. 

It’s an odd narrative twist, and one that I feel is unpersuasive. The whole point of the Padhānasutta is the Bodhisatta’s absolute confidence and committment, and it feels strange that he would then simply realize that he was wrong after all and completely change course, dismissing all his work as “pointless” (_anatthasañhita_). Clearly whatever he was doing was *not* pointless, for it allowed him to overcome Māra’s armies.

Moreover, the qualities and practices spoken of in the Sutta sound Buddhist, and quite unlike the Jains or other practictioners of self-torment. He says nothing about burning up past kamma, or that pleasure is to be gained by pain, which is the belief that drove him to extremes of austerity ([mn85:10.2]). On the contrary, he speaks of having faith, energy, and wisdom, of mindfulness, and especially the calm mind of immersion in _samādhi_. The prose accounts of austerities say nothing like this. Indeed, it was the fact that he could *not* find tranquillity that drove him to abandon austerities. When listing the “ten armies of Māra” he names only psychological obstacles to meditation as understood in Buddhism, which are not mentioned in the prose accounts. 

One unusual phrase is where the Bodhisatta says to Māra that he had attained the “supreme” (_uttama_) “feeling” (_vedanā_). This is reminiscent of the prose claim that he had experienced the “ultimate” (_parama_) “painful feeling” (_dukkha vedanā_, [mn85:30.2]), hence Bhikkhu Bodhi translates it as “I have experienced extreme pain”. But it would be wise to not insist on this point, for the Mahāvastu has the supreme “state” (_padaṁ_), a term for Nibbana, while the Saṅghabhedavastu has supreme “intention” (_cetanā_), which would refer to his avowed dedication to Awakening. These are not merely variant readings, but three quite different interpretations of the narrative, each of which finds support in the text.

- _Vedanā_: Verses 9 and 10 speak of the drying up of blood and flesh, reaching the extremes of painful “feeling” through self-mortification.
- _Cetanā_: Verses 16 through 19 express a vivid and undaunted “intention” to triumph against all odds and vanquish his demons.
- _Pada_: Verses 7 and 8 says he has no need for merit and possesses wisdom, while in verse 11 he claims to be pure, and in verse 5 he is referred to as the “Buddha”, all of which suggest this episode happened after he was enlightened. Note too that the verb “attained” (_patta_)—which is found in all three versions—is normally used of reaching a spiritual achievement, not of experiencing a feeling.

If we see this episode through the lens of the prose accounts, which emphasize the distinct break between the periods of self-torment and the undertaking of _jhāna_, this Sutta uneasily straddles the divide. Perhaps, then, the mistake is ours, and we should not try to impose that framework on the text, ignoring the prose accounts and simply taking the Padhānasutta as-is.

It depicts the Bodhisatta undertaking a strenuous program of meditation. He is practicing a rigorous self-denial in respect of food and rest, but not the full range of austerities. It was while practicing in this way that he purified his mind of obstacles, not because of pain, but because of energy and determination. There was no abrupt shift from the path of austerities to that of _jhāna_. 

In this light, we can propose a fourth explanation for the difficult phrase, “attained the supreme feeling” (_pattassuttamavedanaṁ_). This occurs immediately after the Bodhisatta has said that his mind has become clear, with strong mindfulness, wisdom, and immersion. The next line speaks of distinterest in sensuality, and the purity of a being. Throughout the Suttas, _jhāna_ is is an “attainment” regarded as the highest feeling, one that is realized through immersion, which rejects sensual pleasure, which is a state of purity, and which was a pivotal realization on the Bodhisatta’s journey. 

There is no doubt that the division between self-torment and meditation, which was a fundamental feature of the Dhamma starting with the very first sermon, was never observed quite so clearly in Buddhist culture, as is attested by the popularity of images of the “fasting Bodhisattva”. The practice of austerities was always a troubling episode for later hagiographers. If such austerities were really such a waste of time, why did the Bodhisatta do them in the first place, given that he had already been developing the _pāramīs_ for many lilfetimes? Of course, the _pāramīs_ are not part of early Buddhism, and in the Suttas he undertook austerities because he did not know what he was doing. 

This Sutta suggests that this ambiguity with regards to austerity was present from an early time. It would be wrong to revise the whole history of Buddhism based on a single, rather ambiguous, text, but it does suggest that the clear division between austerities and _jhāna_ became emphasized in the prose accounts, probably to distinguish the Buddha from the Jains. Reality is rarely so clear-cut.

There is a curious shift in narrative voice. The opening verse has the Buddha speaking in first person (_maṁ_), but after Māra’s verses the text refers to the Buddha in the third person. Jayawickrama suggests we correct to _naṁ_ or _taṁ (i)maṁ_, but Norman rejects these emendations on the basis of the commentary, and regards the phrase as an accusative version of the common idiom _so’haṁ_; the same idiom occurs in dative in verse 11: _tassa me_. Here the commentary must be right, for the reading in the Mahāvastu doesn’t admit of such ambiguity (_mayā_). The Lalitavistara rephrases this line, perhaps because its more refined literary sensibilities did not admit such a lapse. Given that the opening verses are quite different in the three versions, it’s likely they were added later to introduce the story, but the shift in voice remains unexplained. Perhaps it is simply a sign of a slightly raw and unedited original.

Less inexplicable is the text’s occasional flirtation with a literal depiction of Māra’s armies. When Siddhattha says that he sees Māra on his mount, surrounded by his forces in full battle-array ([snp3.2:18.1]), it sounds decidely un-psychological and more like the flamboyant representations of Māra and his armies that became so popular in later legend and art. But this is one of the several verses of the Pali that have no parallel in the Mahāvastu or the Lalitavistara, and which seem to have been added to give extra dramatic flair.

Both of the Sanskritic versions have a much briefer final section, so this was probably expanded in the Pali. One point of agreement, however, is that even in its few verses the Mahāvastu, like the Pali, mentions that he will lead many disciples to freedom from Māra. This is one of the aspects of Māra’s mythology that is often overlooked. Yes, Māra is, as here, a psychological metapohor for defilements. But he is also something larger: a personalized representation of the darkness that afflicts the world. If Māra is defeated once, he can be defeated again, which is why he was so determined to ensure the Bodhisatta could not succeed in his quest. Myth exalts the personal to the universal. This is a story of a man sitting under a tree on the bank of the Nerañjara river 2,500 years ago, battling his personal demons. But it is also all of us, now, wherever we are, battling our own personal demons. And no matter how many times we are defeated, we are inspired to get up once more, for we know that victory is possible: it has happened once, so it can happen again.

### Well-Spoken Words

In the Aṅguttara-style Subhāsitasutta, the Buddha lists four factors of “well-spoken speech” and reiterates his teaching with a simple verse. Vaṅgīsa feels inspired to speak, and lends his poetic flair to expanding and elaborating the teaching ([snp3.3]). The discourse is repeated at [sn8.5], and Vaṅgīsa’s verses are included in his Theragāthā ([thag21.1:19]–22). As a short discourse on practical ethics, with a special acknowledgment of the role of the teacher, this feels like it would be better suited for the previous chapter. 

There is no real parallel in the Aṅguttara, the closest being [an5.198], which lists five factors of well-spoken speech with a prose introduction similar to the Subhāsitasutta. The five factors, however, differ.

The Buddha’s portion of the Sutta has the peculiarity that the first factor of “well-spoken speech” is explained as “well-spoken speech”, an oddity that is not cleared up in his verse. The four factors, however, map against the regular four kinds of right speech, albeit in a different order.

- Truthful speech: 1 = 4
- Harmonious speech: 2 = (1)
- Pleasant: 3 = 3
- Meaningful speech: 4 = 2

It seems that here, “well-spoken speech” implies speech leading to harmony, which more-or-less agrees with Vaṅgīsa’s expansion. But I can’t help feeling that we’re missing something in understanding why this Sutta is formed the way it is.

It’s noteworthy that for the Buddha, the verse is plain and redundant in meaning; it serves only as a mnemonic to support the prose. Vaṅgīsa doesn’t merely decorate the verses, but expands the meaning, claiming, for example, that “truth is the undying word”. His final verse corresponds with speech on the Dhamma, but he does not mention that word, instead speaking about the Buddha’s words. While the word _dhamma_ can have many meanings in the Suttas, the sense of “the Buddha’s teachings” is perhaps the most common. He also re-orders the teaching so that it climaxes with the Buddha’s words, a significant shift, since the final factor is felt to be the most important. For the Buddha, the most important thing is that speech is true; for Vaṅgīsa, the most important thing is that it is spoken by the Buddha. These verses have the same order in the Udānavarga, so it is no accident (Uv 8.11–15). 

### With Bhāradvāja of Sundarikā on the Sacrificial Cake

The Buddha encounters another Bhāradvāja in the Pūraḷāsasutta, also known as the Sundarikabhāradvājasutta ([snp3.4]). This Bhāradvāja is engaged in the ancient Vedic rite of fire-worship on the banks of the Sundarikā river. The same encounter is told at [sn7.9], but while the prose setting is the same, only four verses are shared. Our current Sutta is much longer, and in some aspects appears corrupted, so it is likely to have been expanded from SN 7.9. A Bhāradvāja of Sundarikā appears as a champion of the virtues of ritual bathing in [mn7:19.1], and is there converted and ordains just as here, so they can’t be the same person. 

The contours of all these encounters is the same. The brahmin believes in the efficay of Vedic ritual, but the Buddha counters this with his practical ethics, leading to the Brahmin’s conversion, ordination, and ultimately arahantship. Clearly these are built according to a template. 

In the prose introduction, Sundarikabhāradvāja wishes to share the leftovers from his sacrifice with someone, and spies the Buddha meditating. The Buddha has pulled his robe over his head—to ward off insects or inclement weather—and not until he uncovers it does Sundarikabhāradvāja realize that he is shaven. When he asks the Buddha’s caste, the Buddha begins the verse exchange by asserting that he has no caste, and accuses the brahmnin of asking an inappropriate question. The brahmin seems to think this is a little harsh, saying it’s merely a formality among brahmins. Indeed, the Buddha made no objection when King Bimbisāra asked the same question ([snp3.1:17.4]), and in SN 7.9 he merely says to ask about conduct rather than caste. This line is unmetrical, and is the first of several lines in this passage that appear to be prose. 

The rather confrontational tone continues when the Buddha, out of nowhere, challenges the brahmin regarding knowledge of the Gāyatrī Mantra. This is the most famous of Vedic verses is called the Sāvitti in Pali, but the description of the number of lines and syllables leaves no doubt as to what it refers to. Quite apart from the oddness of the Buddha issuing such a challenge, it’s a lame flex. Everyone knows this verse. 

The brahmin, sensibly, ignores this and asks why so many people perform the sacrifice, to which the Buddha says the donor profits if they give to a _vedagū_. The Buddha doesn’t explain himself, but to him this means someone who is freed by mastering the wisdom of the threefold knowledges (_tevijjā_). To the brahmin, on the other hand, it means someone who has memorized the Vedas. Coming after the Gāyatrī challenge, he has every reason to think the Buddha shares his understanding. Nonetheless, even this brief and somewhat incoherent exchange is sufficient to convince him of the Buddha’s wisdom. Conversion narratives in the Suttas often have this kind of abruptness, almost as if there is something missing. Perhaps the missing piece is the power of the Buddha’s presence, his overwhelming charisma. 

He asks the Buddha about a profitable way to perform a sacrifice, prompting the long series of verses that make up the main teaching passage. Here the incoherence of the opening exchange is left behind, and we return to the Buddha’s familiar practice of redefining Brahmanical ideas in his own terms. The discourse ends with the Buddha refusing to eat “enchanted” food, as in [snp1.4]. Just as any kind of wood can produce a fire, any person who has conducted themselves well and left defilements behind can be a true brahmin. 

### With Māgha

The Māghasutta tells us yet another story of how a brahmin approached the Buddha to ask about making an offering or a sacrifice ([snp3.5]). This time he is a _māṇava_, an apprenticed student, yet he appears to already have confidence in the Buddha. He asks how an offering is purified, and the Buddha says, as in the previous Sutta, that it is when the recipient is pure and unattached. When asked about who in the world is unattached, the Buddha gives a long series of verses, similar to the previous Sutta, extolling the arahants as the pure ones worthy of offerings.

Satisfied, Māgha asks about how to accomplish an offering, to which the Buddha replies that the giver should also be pure, with a heart full of love. Finally, Māgha asks how to be reborn in the Brahmā realm. The Buddha, rather than questioning the point of this wish, says that to be reborn in the Brahmā realm, one must offer to the worthy with the three-fold sacrifice, which at [dn5:15.1] is defined as having no regrets before, during, or after giving. This is a controversial answer, as it is normally understood that to be reborn in the Brahma realm it takes more than generosity: one must develope at least first _jhāna_. 

For example, [an4.15] talks of developing absorption through the four _brahmavihāras_ (love, compassion, rejoicing, and equanimity), and being reborn in various Brahmā realms as a result. The Sutta distinguishes between an ordinary person—who remains in that realm so long as it lasts, then is reborn in a lower realm—and a disciple of the Buddha, who becomes extinguished in that realm.

However, the idea is not entirely without parallel in the suttas. For example, the Dānamahapphalasutta says that one who gives with the thought that the gift is an adornment and prerequisite of the mind will be reborn in the Brahmā realm, and even become a non-returner ([an7.52:12.12]). This gives a clue as the interpretation. Giving as adornment and prerequisite for the mind means that the act of giving is part of the development of the mind in the eightfold path. Obviously it is not meant to discount the importance of the remainder of the path. But giving is one of those factors that make it possible for all the rest of the factors to come to fulfillment. And that includes the development of _jhāna_. While this doesn’t completely resolve the difference between the two perspectives, it does show that they are linked.

### With Sabhiya

The Sabhiyasutta tells the story of the wanderer Sabhiya and his questions for the Buddha ([snp3.6]). Ultimately he ordains and becomes an arahant. This is probably the same Sabhiya whose verses at [thag4.3] are an admonishment to lax monks. The Sabhiya Kaccāna of [sn44.11] and [mn127] may or may not be the same person.

Sabhiya has, quite literally, a mission from god. A former relative has appeared to him in divine form after death, and charged him with finding the answers to a series of questions. Like King Ajātasattu in [dn2] Sāmaññaphalasutta, he had questioned the six prominent _samaṇa_ teachers and succeeded only in annoying them. Sabhiya was disillusioned to the point where he was about to give up on his spiritual practice altogether. But he went at last to the Buddha, who welcomed his questions with warmth and openness.

Sabhiya asks about the proper way to understand various terms, all of which describe a spritually ideal person. There are twenty terms in all, divided into five groups of four. The division appears to be merely a literary artefact without meaningful significance.

The Buddha answers each of the questions, speaking to the spiritual ideal embodied in the words, rather than simply listing off the disctionary meanings. These often rely on wordplay that is not easy to represent elegantly in English. Indeed, some of the puns are obscured in the Indic dialects, and have been used in an attempt to trace the dialectical history of the text. The Hybrid Sanskrit parallel in the Mahāvastu offers additional source material for this inquiry, as does the Chinese translation, which is included in the Abhiniṣkramaṇasūtra, a late biography. 

His depression banished, Sabhiya expresses his joy in a long series of devotional verses, and asks the Buddha for ordination.

### With Sela

The Selasutta, which is also found at [mn92],  offers another story of conversion and ordination resulting in arahantship ([snp3.7]). It shares a few passages in common with the Sabhiyasutta.

This time, however, the narrative is more complex. The Buddha is sojourning in Āpaṇa, a city in what is today eastern Bihar, which is near the easternmost extent of his travels. Since his visit there was fairly unusual, the matted-hair brahmanical ascetic Keṇiya was excited to receive him and offer a meal for the whole Saṅgha of over a thousand mendicants. The Buddha cautioned him about the extent of the offering, both due to the size of the Saṅgha and the fact that he was a follower of the brahmins. If it seems unlikely that a matted-hair ascetic should have the considerable resources to make such an offering, consider that today it is common for bhikkhus to organize events on a similar scale. 

While Keṇiya was busying himself with preparations, the prominent brahmin Sela came by with three hundred students. On inquiry, Keṇiya says he is preparing for a large sacrifice (_mahāyañña_), which is an interestingly direct example of how offerings to the Saṅgha took over the role of the sacrifice in Brahmanism. 

Sela is thrilled to hear the word “Buddha”, and wants to know whether the Buddha possesses the famed “32 marks of a great man”. The bulk of the discourse consists of Sela’s verses extolling the Buddha, and the Buddha’s responses. Inspired, Sela asks for ordination together with his students, and went forth right there. 

The meal with Keṇiya was the next morning, and following it the Buddha gave the verses of _anumodanā_. Today, such recitations are typically believed to be either a quasi-magical “blessing” given by the mendicants, or an act of sharing merit with departed relatives. But in the Suttas, the _anumodanā_ is a reflection on cause and effect, emphasizing the merit created by the giver due to their actions.

Sela with his students went on to prractice meditation in retreat and attain arahantship. They returned to the Buddha where Sela announced their achievement and offered further homage to the Buddha.

### The Dart

The Sallasutta offers a reflection on the inevitability of death and the “dart” of grief that a meditator should pluck out ([snp3.8]). Its blunt declarations are a departure from the narrative and devotional texts that characterize this chapter, and perhaps would feel more at home in the Aṭṭhakavagga. 

Some might find such teachings to be too strong, but for others the bluntness is refreshing; and I would include myself there. The Buddha is not being confrontational for the sake of it. He is simply asking us to accept the facts of life from which we normally want to hide. It is natural to respond to death with grief, but the grieving creates nothing but more distress. Sometimes it is as if the relatives who remain feel obliged to show excessive grief as a demonstration of love and loyalty, but this is not the Buddha’s way. Our grieving does nothing to help the dead, so why do we hurt ourselves?

The opening lines say that there is no _nimitta_ for mortal life. This doesn’t mean that there is no such thing as a “sign” of life.  _Nimitta_ is a term used in horoscopes and prophecy, and here it means there is no way the end of life can be predicted. The Buddha is countering those who claim to be able to predict the course of life, a practice that is still common in India today.

For all the hold the grief has on the mind, the Buddha says it can be dispelled as lightly as a tuft of cotton blown by the wind. The Sutta is not morbidly dwelling on death; it is promising us that we can be free from the spell of death and grief.

## With Vāseṭṭha

In the Vāseṭṭhasutta ([snp3.9]), the brahmins Vāseṭṭha and Bhāradvāja, each the accomplished student of a recognized master, hold opposing views on the fundamental question of what really makes a person a brahmin. Both of these are ancestral clan names of the brahmins, and it is not easy to know who the actual individuals behind them. Bhāradvāja takes the traditional view that it is one’s ancestry that matters, while Vāseṭṭha points to the importance of how you live your life. 

Such is the fundamental dilemma of any religious or spiritual path once it has become institutionalized. The defining marks of sanctity become expressed in an external form, be it caste, lineage, garb, or ordination. It is this external form that, of necessity, governs the external priveliges of religious communities, such as who gets to perform rituals and, even more to the point, who gets to own the real estate. Being a good person is not enough; and sometimes it seems that it is an impediment. 

Despite the presence of many expert brahmins in the area, Vāseṭṭha suggests they ask the Buddha. Given his respectful approach to the Buddha, and the fact that it was his opinion that agreed with the Buddha’s perspective, it seems likely that he was already at least somewhat familiar with the Buddha’s teachings.

The Buddha points out that in the natural world, species are defined by their birth, each to their own kind. But in the human realm this is not so. There is no biological characteristic by which humans can be classed. This is a radical poisition, which rejects any form of “essentialist” classification of humanity. In modern terms this would include pseudo-scientific notions such as “race”, which have no definitive biological meaning, but rather are mediatetd through culture and history. Strikingly, the Buddha explicitly mentions the genitalia here, thus rejecting gender essentialism based on biology. As is the case with race, modern biology rejects any single biological sex characteristic, acknowledging that biological sex is a complex phenomenon with diverse manifestations.

Rather than innate biological differences, the Buddha says that humans are differentiated by “convention”, that is, through what is socially and culturally agreed-upon. And such distinctions are made on the basis of a person’s deeds. Whether a farmer, a trader, or a ruler, it is how a person lives their life that makes them who they are. Among these livelihoods, the Buddha includes a ritualist who performs priestly rites and sacrifices, showing what he thought of the conventional duties of a brahmin.

The Buddha goes on to speak of a true brahmin, who becomes so when they are free of attachments, living an ideal life of non-harming, wisdom, and moral purity. It is deeds that make the world go round, and deeds that define a person in the eyes of others; but a true brahmin has made an end of all deeds.

The entire Sutta is also found in [mn98](), while most of the verses are found in the Dhammapadas.

## With Kokālika

Any hero needs a nemesis, and the Buddha’s nemesis was his cousin Devadatta. Devadatta’s story is told primarily in the “Chapter on Schism in the Sangha”  of the Vinaya (_Saṁghabhedakakkhandhaka_ [kd17]()), but there are many discourses that record various incidents or statements relating to him. Such is the Kokālikasutta, which records the attack by an acolyte of Devadatta on the Buddha’s two chief disciples, Sāriputta and Moggallāna ([snp3.10]()). The context is found in the above-mentioned chapter on schism, where Kokālika is one of the first monks approached by Devadatta to enlist in his scheme to split the Saṅgha and replace the Buddha.

Both there and here, Kokālika is said to have issued a harsh and groundless accusation against Sāriputta and Moggallāna, accusing them of having wicked desires. In the Vinaya, however, he warns Devadatta, when Sāriputta and Moggallāna come to redeem the errant monks who have followed Devadatta. Here he has the temerity to make the accusation to the Buddha. This approach seems clumsy and doomed to failure, and on that basis might be seen as unlikely, were it not for the fact that history furnishes us with plentiful examples of failed coups attempted by goonish dolts. 

Failing to turn the Buddha against his chief students, Kokālika leaves, but horrifying boils erupt on his body; he dies and goes to hell. The remainder of the Sutta is given over to describing the length of duration of the hells and the gruesome torment that awaits a person there who has maligned the noble ones. 

The idea that maligning a person of purity is an especially heinous act is not original to Buddhism, for the brahmins have a similar doctrine regarding anyone who maligns a brahmin. It’s important to recognize that there plenty of cases in the Suttas and Vinaya where senior monks, and even the Buddha, were criticized, and it did not result in such a drastic kammic result. If the criticism is made in good faith, then it is considered whether it is true or not, and in some cases the Buddha was happy to adopt the recommendations made by critics. In the case of Kokālika, however, he and the other followers of Devadatta had repeatedly demonstrated their lack of integrity, so by this point the Buddha simply rejected Kokālika’s bad faith accusations out of hand. 

The prose section and the first four verses find parallels in the Pali at [sn6.10]() and [an10.89](), while the fifth and sixth verses have several parallels in Dhammapadas and elsewhere. The remaining verses, which detail the torments of hell, are unique to this Sutta. They have presumably been added later, and the commentary ascribed them to Moggallāna. They have much in common with the similarly-late Devadūta Sutta ([mn130]). According to the commentary, the final two verses beginning with the counting of the years in the Pink Lotus Hell, were not mentioned in the (now lost) commentarial text upon which the commentary was based. Most likely, these verses were added by redactors, presumably at some point during the transmission in Sri Lanka. 

## About Nālaka

The Nālakasutta is divided into two portions ([snp3.11]). The introductory narrative tells the famous story of how the hermit Asita visited the newborn Siddhattha and prophecied his future Buddhahood. He was old and would not live to see the Buddha himself, so he urged his nephew Nālaka to seek out the Buddha when the time came. Many years later, Nālaka heard that the Buddha had indeed appeared in fulfillment of Asita’s prediction. The second portion of the Sutta tells of how Nālaka went to the Buddha and asked about the way of the sage (_muni_). 

Those who know the story of the Buddha’s life will recall the familiar tale of how Asita was the former chaplain of Siddhattha’s grandfather and teacher to his father Suddhodana. He visited the court of King Suddhodana in his grand palace, where a multitude of brahmin soothsayers had foretold that the prince would become either a wheel-turing monarch or an all-seeing Buddha. They will be well aware of how Asita, examining the boy for the 32 marks of a Great Man, was the first to realize that the other soothsayers were wrong: the boy was surely destined to become a Buddha. And they will know that the reason Asita would never see the Buddha was that he was destined to be reborn for many aeons in the formless realms, where beings are removed from involvement in the material dimensions. 

What they may not know is that in this, the earliest version of events, none of these details are found. Asita was not a beloved former teacher, and in fact appears nowhere else in the Suttas. There is no mention of a king, a palace, or a court therein, only Suddhodana with his family in his home. No soothsayers are spoken of, nor the 32 marks. There was no “examination” of the boy and his marks; Asita merely “saw” him lying on his cot. Nor does the text speak of conflicting prophecies, for the boy’s destiny was known even to the mere worldly gods before Asita appeared. Asita is not said to have been destined for the formless realms; rather, he is simply old and will not live long. The rebirth in the formless realms was probably intended to show that Asita belonged to the most exalted circles of brahmanical meditators, while also filling an awkward plot-hole: why  could he not simply return to see the Buddha from wherever he had been reborn?

The Nālakasutta is, in fact, a rare witness of a transitional phase in the rapidly-evolving legend of the Buddha. Along with [mn123] and [dn14], it is one of the earliest sources for certain crucial aspects of the Buddha’s mythology, in particular the idea that Siddhattha was, from the time of his birth, a _bodhisatta_ destined for enlightenment. Nonetheless, the dramatic and mythological significance of events is not yet fully drawn out, and the relatively simple account of the Nālakasutta was, for all practical purposes, soon overshadowed by the more developed legends. A Sutta like this speaks quietly with a very specific voice. It deserves a hearing on its own terms.

According to the commentaries, the introduction was composed by Ānanda on the request of Mahākassapa at the First Council. While this confirms that it was not the Buddha’s words, in fact it must be considerably later than this, and probably originated a few centuries after the Buddha’s passing. Jayawickrama identifies a range of late features, including multiplicity of late and Sanskritic words, decorative poetics, and a variety of metres, all of which set the introduction quite apart from the passages that follow. 

The introductory verses share these late features with those of the Pārāyanavagga. Both passages are called _vatthugāthā_, a term used nowhere else. In both cases, an elder sage sets the action in motion by urging their younger counterparts to seek out the Buddha. This legendary narrative serves to frame a set of teachings that stem from an earlier age. Such stories fulfill a need for the Buddhist community in the time that they were composed. The Pārāyanavagga is a conversion narrative, which supports the geographical expansion of the Buddha’s teachings in the south of India. The Nālakasutta fulfills a more universal need: to exalt the Buddha’s teachings within the cosmic and eternal significance of the Buddha as a person.

The Buddha gave only sparse details of his early life, so after his death, the Buddhist community swiftly moved to complete the narrative. It is conventional for the birth of a great hero to be heralded with prophecy. The Buddha’s silence on this topic leaves a gap that yearns to be filled. Never mind that the Buddha consistently spoke against the very idea of using marks and signs to tell the future. And leave aside the inconvenient detail that the very essence of his teaching, from his first words until his last, was the practice of the eightfold path, not the fulfillment of a destiny. The mythic impulse is not so easily dismissed. In the early Buddhist community, as the historical Buddha faded from living memory, there grew an insatiable need for stories to keep him alive. 

Myth serves this purpose, for it tells of things that “never were, but are always”. This is a not a paradox, but a simple psychological reality. For those who are born into a religious tradition, there is no first moment when the story of the Buddha is heard. It has always been there, told and retold in story, in painting, and in song, surrounding you from before you had the language to hear it. There never was a time when Siddhattha did not become a Buddha. The prophecy of Asita is not a historical record of a soothsayer and his prediction, but rather, is confirmation of the eternal and inevitable reality of the Buddha. It is not a historical account of what *actually* happened, but a mythological account of what *must have* happened.

The sutta opens with Asita’s vision of the gods while in meditation. They are dancing and singing with exuberance, celebrating the birth of the Bodhisatta. The gods are, in this mythological context, able to see the significance of this event, and even to predict specific details like the teaching of the First Sermon in the “Grove of the Hermits”, i.e. the Isipatana near Benares. Asita then hurries to see the newborn babe, where he confirms the prophecy. But he bursts into tears when he realizes that he is too old and will die before witnessing the magnificence of Awakening. 

Asita’s tears at the Buddha’s birth echo the tears of Ānanda, who, when he learned of the Buddha’s imminent demise, could not bear to face life without his beloved Teacher. Did Ānanda—the putative author of this story—wish to emphasize Asita’s emotional vulnerability here, drawing on his own experience? We cannot say, but we can say that this kind of narrative echoing is an outstanding feature of early Buddhist mythic narratives. Ostensibly unrelated texts in different collections are formed with an eye to mirroring related events. While the _vatthugāthā_ as we have it appears to be later than Ānanda, there is no doubt that Ānanda himself was the literary founder of the Buddha’s legend. The texts as we have them today are profoundly influenced by his methods and sensibilities, and it is, I believe, likely that such methods and details were originated by him. 

What can we say about the sage Asita? He appears without explanation or context, yet unhesitatingly takes a position of prominence in the home of a powerful man. It is as if the text assumes that audience will be familiar with him, and will take such confidence for granted. A survey of related early texts suggests that this was in fact the case, and that Asita fulfills an archetype that we shall call the “dark hermit”. It is, I believe, the loss of awareness of this archetype that prompted the later tradition to say that he was the family chaplain, since they needed a new explanation for the familiarity and respect with which Asita was received in Suddhodana’s home.

The word _asita_ can have a variety of meanings in Pali, including “black” and “unattached”. The latter seems like a good name for a hermit, and it is indeed the explanation given in some Sanskrit and Tibetan sources, where it is taken as _akleṣa_. But the text also refers to him as _kaṇhasiri_ “dark splendor”, and later texts also call him _kāladevala_, “Dark Devala”. It would seem, then, that the relevant sense of _asita_ is “black”. The Pali commentary confirms that this is a reference to his skin color.

His name and status as a “dark hermit” (_isi_) link him with other passages in a way that is surprisingly revealing. The  similarly-named hermit Asita Devala (“Devala the Dark”) appears in the Assalāyanasutta ([mn93]), where the Buddha relates to the prideful brahmin student Assalāyana how Asita Devala challenged seven hermits on the doctrine of caste. Now, curiously enough, in the Ambaṭṭhasutta ([dn3]) we find yet another “black” hermit, this one named Kaṇha, whose story is also told by the Buddha in a conversation with a prideful brahmin student. 

All of these passages, while quite different, have a range of features in common. A powerful hermit (_isi_) named “black” apears in a quasi-lengendary narrative. They are an outsider, who though respected and associated with the brahmanical tradition, is not exactly a part of it. They challenge the accepted order of things. Kaṇha is the son of a slave-girl, and his descendants became regarded as brahmins. Asita Devala, likewise challenging the brahmanical notions of lineage, is notably not identified as a brahmin, in contrast with the “seven Brahmin sages” (_satta brāhmaṇisayo_). 

The “dark hermits” appear in marginal spaces. Asita Devala is in a wilderness hermitage, while Kaṇha learns magic in the south. The latter detail is especially interesting, as during the Buddha’s time, the south of India was largely unknown, and was regarded as outside the sphere of civilized Aryan lands. While the Nālakasutta itself says nothing of Asita’s origins, both the Mahāvastu and the Nidānakathā place him in the south. In the Pārāyanavagga we shall meet another sage who made his way to the remote southern lands and encountered an exponent of dark magics there. 

All of this evokes a tradition of outsider ascetics of a dark skin color, known for their magical abilities, and associated with the south. It would seem likely that these are a cultural memory, and perhaps cultural reality, of non-brahmin or pre-brahmin ascetics or shamans who predated the arrival of the brahmins in India. They interacted with the brahmins in complex ways, sometimes being adopted by them and changing brahmanical culture from the inside. 

All this begs the question: are these various hermits, in fact, one and the same? Several modern commentators have remarked on the apparent “confusion” between the Asita of the Nālakasutta and the Asita Devala of the Assalāyanasutta. But this way of thinking assumes that there were originally different individuals, whose separate identities later became conflated. As a monk, however, I am keenly aware of how, when an ordained person appears to others, they are wrapped in two robes: the ochre robes that protect the body, and the robes of preconceptions and projections. I would suggest that the “dark hermit”, while a genuine reality of life in ancient India, was perceived in terms of an archetype or stereotype. When we encounter a dark hermit in our texts, we are seeing a partially-differentiated figure drawn from the archetype. That is not to say that there is not an actual person at the root of the story, only that their depiction is shaped by cultural stereotypes.

Since _kaṇha_ is simply the Pali spelling of Sanskrit _kṛṣṇa_, it is further tempting to associate these hermits with the famed god Krishna of later Hinduism. Indeed, it may be that the deity known as Krishna is first attested in Buddhist texts, for a tale in the Ummaggajātaka (Ja 542) tells of how the outcaste maiden Jampāvatī was made queen by King Kaṇha Vāsudeva. Like the dark hermits, he transgresses the expected conventions of lineage. Vāsudeva is, of course, a common name of Krishna. It would be, however, overly literal to claim that these were the same historical figures. These contexts are vague and legendary, framed as reports of days of yore, and associated with weird magics. They tell us something of how such figures were thought of, and how they challenged the narrow assumptions of brahmanical theories of lineage. 

All this tells us that Asita the “Black” sage or “Dark Splendour” appears in the Nālakasutta as a figure of legend, a marvellous and revered font of wisdom and magic, come to disrupt the notions of legacy and succession. Unlike the other dark hermits, he is implied to be a brahmin, or at least, so much is suggested when he is described as “master of marks and hymns” (_lakkhaṇamantapāragū_). “Hymns” are the Vedas, while “marks” are signs discerned as a basis for prophecy, most famously the 32 marks of the Great Man. Like other brahmanical figures of note—including Indra and Brahmā himself—he serves to uplift and validate the Buddha in the eyes of the brahmins. 

The descriptions of the gods and the home of Suddhodana are unusually colorful and vivid, although still fairly restrained compared to later Indian literature. Notably, the verses mostly avoid using royal language in the depiction of Siddhattha’s home and family. Suddhodana is not referred to as king, and his residence is described simply as a “home” (_bhavana_). The infant is referred to as _kumāra_, which can mean “prince”, but can equally well mean simply “boy”. Given that there is no mention of a king, the humbler translation seems preferable. The lavish descriptors and honorifics are used only of the boy, not for his family or home. The only “royal” language is the _antepūra_ from which the sage departs at the end. This was a kind of walled compound inside which the rulers resided. But the description overall is quite compatible with what we know of the Sakyans from the early sources, namely that they were an aristocratic republic who elected “rulers” (_rājā_) from the leading clans to serve as rulers for limited periods. In later legend, of course, Suddhodana was elevated to the status of a king, but it seems the current Sutta predates this.

The gods on Meru’s peak refer to the newborn baby as  _bodhisatta_, “one intent on Awakening”, which is the only time this term occurs in the Suttanipāta. The earliest usage of _bodhisatta_ was, it seems, to refer to Siddhattha after he had left home and was actively seeking Awakening. There is no suggestion in the major Sutta passages that such Awakening was predestined, or indeed, that predestination or prophecy was possible. The burden of the _vatthugāthā_, in fact, is to establish the reality and reliability of prophecy. From here, it was but a small step to infer that the _bodhisatta_ was already destined to become Awakening in a past life long ago.

As to the main teaching passage, it is one of the classic “sage” (_muni_) texts in the Suttanipāta. In his opening question, Nālaka tells the Buddha that the Asita’s words had come true. This establishes a connection between the two parts, and suggests that, while the details of the _vatthugāthā_ are late, they may have drawn from a genuine story of a sage named Asita who spoke of a Buddha. Nālaka’s brief mention, however, says nothing of prophecy, and might just as well have been spoken in a situation similar to the Pārāyanavagga, where an elder sage encouraged a student to seek out the Buddha. It is rarely the case that such legendary narratives are either entirely factual or entirely invented. 

The Buddha urges Nālaka to practice restraint in all circumstances, leaving behind the tempations of the worldly life. He is not sugar-coating it, but warns that the path wil be hard. Seeing one’s oneness with all creatures, one would never harm any of them. The life of as renunciant is solitary, devoted to meditation under a tree, and walking for alms content to receive little or nothing. The text occasionally evokes teachings from elsewhere in the Nikāyas, as when the Buddha says to practice as if “licking a razor’s edge”, per [sn35.235:4.1] or [thag16.2:12.4] with “tongue pressed on the roof of the mouth”, per [mn20:7.2], etc.

The sutta concludes in praise of the virtues of silence.

## Contemplating Pairs

The Dvayatānupassanāsutta finishes off the “Great Chapter” with a long discourse in mixed prose and verse ([snp3.12]). It’s an unusual discourse for the Suttanipāta. Length-wise it would fit with the Suttas of the Majjhima. Doctrinally, too, it focusses on the four noble truths and other core doctrines in a way that is remininscent of the longer prose discourses. The fact, however, that it is based around the number two, and that each section consists of a prose statement and verse paraphrase, suggests an extended text in the Aṅguttara style. 

It seems that the compilers of the Piṭakas tried to ensure that major doctrines were found in each of the collections. This was, presumably, because each collection would have been memorized by different students. Obviously there would have been interaction between them, but it makes sense for students of every collection to have at least some teachings on the fundamental doctrines. Of course the tradition held that the four noble truths can be found in every teaching, even if indirectly, but it seems there was a need for a direction exposition as well.

The discourse begins with the Buddha gathering with the assembled Sangha at the Eastern Monastery near Sāvatthī for the fortnightly Sabbath (_uposatha_). The Buddha engages the Sangha by prompting them to consider how they would respond if asked a series of questions. Notice that the Buddha rarely taught by simply expounding a long text to an audience; he usually found a way to draw them in. Here, the question is, why do we listen to the teachings on liberation? And the answer is, to get to know the pairs of teachings, which are then explained.

There are sixteen such pairs. The first pair is the noble truths of suffering and its origin, contrasted with suffering’s cessation and the path. Each subsequent pair follows the same pattern: the first item shows the arising of suffering, the second, its cessation.

Apart from this general thematic pattern, the Sutta does not try to relate each item in a sequential manner. Each item is simply said to be another way of contemplating the pairs. But it is noteworthy that seven items, namely three through nine, correspond exactly with the normal factors of dependent origination starting with ignorance and going up to grasping. The verses on grasping, moreover, speak of three further factors of dependent origination: continued existence (_bhava_), rebirth (_jāti_), and suffering (_dukkha_). That makes ten of the factors of dependent orgination. Left out are “name and form” (_nāmarūpa_), which is mentioned later, in the fifteen item on deceptiveness; and the six senses, which appear in the final set of verses. Thus all the factors of dependent origination appear, albeit in different ways. 

Moreover, several further items that do not appear in the standard list of twelve factors are nonetheless associated with dependent origination. The word “condition” (_paccaya_) occurs no less than 22 times throughout the text. If we start at the beginning, the four noble truths themselves are, of course integrated with dependent origination in several ways in the suttas. The second item, “attachment” (_upadhi_) is similar in meaning to “grasping”, and is found in this sense in the context of dependent origination ([sn12.66:3.6]). The tenth factor, “instigation” (_ārambha_), is not a standard technical term in this sense, and normally it is associated with right effort. The commentary says that it is “energy connected with action” (_kammasampayuttavīriya_), but this seems implausible, as when _ārambha_ is used with _viriya_ it is invariably in a positive sense. Here, rather, it appears to have the sense of “originating kamma” as at [an4.195:6.2], which would make it more or less a synonym of “choices” (_saṅkhārā_). The next factor is “sustenance” or “fuel” (_āhāra_), which occurs frequently in the context of dependent origination as another aspect of “grasping”. Following this the topic is simply “dependence” (_nissita_) itself. We could go on, but it seems clear that virtually all of the items are connected with dependent origination either directly or indirectly.

There is an important detail that, I believe, is key to understanding the construction of this sutta: numbers. In my essay introducing the Aṅguttaranikāya, I pointed out that nunbers are used in the Suttas consciously and with a freighted meaning. Here, the clue is in the title: it’s about contemplating twos. This is brought out in an obvious way in the contemplation of pairs of dhammas. But notice that the sutta is built on another set of pairs: prose and verse. So that means that each item consists of two sets of two, which is expressed as a fourfold matrix: 

- origin in prose
- cessation in prose
- origin in verse
- cessation in verse

Reinforcing this, the very first item is the “four” noble truths, which is also divided into two sets of two. This shows that the text is thinking in terms of fitting multiples of two in each other. But if two twos make four, four fours make sixteen. And there are sixteen items in the whole sutta. This suggests that the overall text has been consciously planned out to reflect this set of doubly-expanded twos. 

This use of multiplied sets of two and four is a characteristic feature of teachings on causality, signifying that it is an expansion of the four noble truths. The standard sequence of dependent origination has twelve items, which is doubled when treated in reverse. The treatment of causality in the Abhidhamma Paṭṭhāna follows suit, with twenty-four distinct kinds of condition, signifying a further developed and expanded treatment of causality. The number sixteen serves a similar purpose here. These nested numerical sets are like a mandala, dividing and subdividing the same fundamental pattern to reveal a more granular detail.

As indicated by the existence of the Aṅguttaranikāya, it was a standard practice to use numbers for organizing texts. This can be traced back to the very first discourse, the Dhammacakkappavattanasutta, which uses a similar scheme of two, four, eight, and twelve. There, however, the numerical structure is additive: a series of distinct doctrines with related numerical expression, are taught in sequence: the two extremes, the four noble truths, the eightfold path, the twelve modes. Here, the numerical structure is recursive: pairs multiply to fours, fours multiply to sixteens. For comparison, I would point to the Dasuttarasutta ([dn34]), which is built on a scheme of ten groups of ten. This is the final discourse in the Dīghanikāya, and is clearly one of the latest Suttas in the canon. And compared with that, the numerical structure of the Dvayatānupassanāsutta is both more complex and less explicit. 

The underlying significance of this numerological system points to *universality* and *order*. Since the Buddha did away with any notion of a creator deity or controlling spirit or consciousness, he taught dependent origination as a way of showing that the word operates according to comprehensible principles and patterns. Yes, we experience terrible suffering, but suffering is not inexplicable or random: if follows rules. And those rules, like the laws of science, apply everywhere and in every time. And this means that we can implement an organized and effective response to suffering; namely, the path.  The teaching (_dhamma_) unfolds as a reflection of reality (_dhamma_), which provides a guide for living (_dhamma_). 

All this suggests that the Dvayatānupassanāsutta is neither early, nor an assemblage that has evolved over time. It was quite deliberately composed with a high degree of artfulness and care according to a single vision. It’s unlikely that this was the Buddha, as he avoided such methods. His use of numerology is much more direct. Like the Dasuttarasutta, the Dvayatānupassanāsutta is on the verge of being overly-clever, more concerned with formalism than meaning. Such formalisms, indeed, would soon dominate Buddhism in the Abhidhamma period, where the entire movement relied on the method of recursively multiplying sets of dhammas. To be sure, the Dvayatānupassanāsutta is far more restrained. And 

As early as 1907, La Vallée Poussin singled out the Dvayatānupassanāsutta as the “most remarkable” of the suttas that appear to presage the Abhidhamma (Louis de la Vallée Poussin, review of C.A.F Rhys Davids’ edition of the Dukapaṭṭhāna, <cite>Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society</cite>, 1907, p. 453). He opined that dependent origination itself was probably a “only a recast of this primitive fragment of Abhidhamma”. His lead has been taken up by a number of scholars since, who have argued that the Dvayatānupassanāsutta includes an incomplete list of the usual items of dependent origination, and further, that it is unsystematic. But the Sutta is, on the contrary, more elaborate than most of those on dependent origination. We can’t just reduce a text to the list of items. [dn14] Mahānidānasutta is another example of a long and elaborate sutta on dependent origination that has fewer than the traditional twelve items. In any case, as I showed above, the Dvayatānupassanāsutta does include virtually all of dependent origination, even if not all are explicitly mentioned as major items. And I think the numerological structure should finally put paid to this argument. It is not unsystematic, but has been carefully and artfully constructed.

I would, therefore, concur with Jayawickrama in concluding that the Dvayatānupassanāsutta is late rather than early. 

One final point. It is often said that insights in physics are driven by aesthetics as much as evidence. The truth, we feel, should be beautiful. And while the beauty of physics may be inscrutable to those like myself who struggle to grasp the basic mathematics, it is both real and inspiring to those who understand. I believe the same can be said of the Abhidhamma. It may be cold and austere, but there is a driving sense of balance and symmetry that underlies the whole project. From this perspective, the Dvayatānupassanāsutta, perhaps more than any other text, strives to harmonize poetic beauty with doctrinal formalism. 

## The Way to the Beyond

The final chapter of the Suttanipāta, the Pārāyanavagga, is a cohesive work, which in terms of its unity and scope is more comparable to a single sutta of the Dīghanikāya than it is to the rest of the Suttanipāta. 

It has been carefully composed to create a narrative with emotional stakes, building to a moving climax. In the opening section, we are introduced to the main characters. We learn of Bāvari, with his earnest and sincere character. We are meant to like him: he is our primary emotional connection. Then he is faced with an imminent and unjust threat, which he cannot face alone. But he has friends, both human and divine, so our sphere of interest expands to include them, reminding us of the crucial role of spiritual friendship. A resolution to the threat is proposed, which instigates a journey of discovery. In the end, the threat is rendered irrelevant, for the journey has led to an outcome that surpasses hope. The story returns to Bāvari, but he is not the man he once was.

This narrative arc forms the setting for the sixteen sets of questions that form the heart of the chapter. Each set of questions is personal and specific, revealing something of the person behind them. We have seen that in the Suttanipāta, the questions can be generic and the actors interchangeable. Not so here. We gradually come to know something of each questioner, and can feel the connection between the topic of the question asked, and the spiritual need and aspiration that underlies it. Thus the questions serve not only to address a variety of interesting doctrinal points, but to reinforce our emotional connection with characters of the story, heightening the resolution in the final passages.

### The Composition of the Pārāyanavagga

An extended text like this doesn’t come from nowhere. The commentary attributes the composition to Venerable Ānanda; but while he may well have had a hand in the older portions, the text as a whole is much later. The sixteen questions are the oldest portion, and, as usual, they would have been passed down together with a story of their provenance. But someone must have been responsible for creating the narrative arc. 

Several of the questions are cited in the Pali Suttas, as well as in other Buddhist literature, where they are said to be “in the Pārāyanavagga”. The Niddesa comments on the questions, but merely repeats the narrative portions without comment. This suggests that the narrative was formed considerably later. And this impression is born out by a variety of evidence, which was persuasively argued by Jayawickrama.

The location falls far outside the normal domain of Buddhism, and indeed even a Brahmanical text treats the remote region of the Dakkhiṇapatha as unholy ground. Several of the places named in the voyage are also named in the account of the Buddhist missions in the time of King Ashoka. 

The narrative form of the story, featuring a curse, is found commonly in later literature. And several of the terms are late. _Vāsana_, for example, is a common term in later Buddhism for the “traces” of kammic influence, but not found in this sense at all in the early texts. In the Pali canon it is only found here, and in the very latest strata of additions, the Netti and the Milinda, both of which are of dubious canonicity, and are post-Ashokan. Jayawickrama cites several other examples of Sanskritic terms and idioms. 

This agreement of multiple independent indications makes it certain that the introduction is late. But what was the motivation? Why set a story in such a far-off land, and fill it with Sanskritic idioms and allusions? In the Ashokan and later years, Buddhism spread to many new lands, from Kashmir in the north-west, to Sri Lanka in the south-east. It is common, if not universal, to find the advance of Buddhism recorded in conversion narratives. A new land must have been visited by the Buddha, or at least by his personal disciples. Buddhism cannot have been a new introduction, but part of the culture of the land since far-off days. As time went on, such conversion narratives became more elaborate and fanciful. It seems likely that the introductory narrative served as a conversion tale for the once-remote land of Dakkhiṇapatha. The word Dakkhiṇapatha means “southern road” and it was the trade route to Andhra, and from there to Sri Lanka. 