# The Senior Nuns Would Like a Word

The Therīgāthā or “Verses of the Senior Nuns” is the ninth book in the Khuddhaka Nikāya of the Pali Canon or Tipiṭaka. It is a collection of about 524 verses attributed to 73 senior nuns, most of whom were alive in the Buddha’s time. 

These verses celebrate the bliss of freedom and the life of meditation, full of proud and joyous proclamations of their spiritual attainments and their gratitude to other nuns as guides and teachers. The Therīgāthā is one of the oldest spiritual texts that records primarily women’s voices. It stems from the same general period as the Hebraic Books of Ruth and Esther, and like those books, it is a natural touchstone for those who wish to reflect on women’s roles in ancient religion.

It is a pair with the Theragāthā, the “Verses of the Senior Monks”. Together these collections constitute one of the oldest and largest records of the voices of contemplatives. Based on style and content, these collections belong to the early discourses, although occasionally the verses seem to be a little later. They are referred to on occasion in the northern canons, but no parallel collections have survived. 

In my introduction to the Theragāthā I gave a general background. Most of those remarks apply equally here, so in this essay I will focus on those things that are specific to the Therīgāthā and refer you to the Theragāthā for the basics.

## The Therīgāthā as a Feminist Text

The Therīgāthā is feminist in the sense of foregrounding women’s voices and experiences, and on occasion pointing to the specific ways that suffering of women is due to gendered discrimination. The overall tenor of the Therīgāthā is vibrant, proud, and celebratory. At the same time, though, it’s critical to remember that these are the voices of women in a very different time and place, and they do not exist to serve our agendas. There’s nothing feminist about eliding, paraphrasing, or interpreting away the voices of women because they’re not saying what we would want them to say. 

The Therīgāthā is, together with the Vinaya, our main source of information about ancient nuns. But the Therīgāthā presents women in a positive light and in their own voices, whereas the Vinaya is by its nature concerned with bad behavior. In addition, the Vinaya has been passed down through the monks’ community and bears the signs of their editorial hand. In recent years it has become common to hear monks who oppose equality for women citing the Vinaya for support, although somehow they always seem to omit the countless times monks behave terribly in the Vinaya. 

The Therīgāthā offers a clear and inspiring call to the spiritual life, one that belongs firmly to the women. In modern times, it has become a key text in developing feminist perspectives on early Buddhism as history, and on modern Buddhism as potential. These voices have foregrounded the Therīgāthā in new ways, opening a new chapter in Buddhism, one that more accurately represents the full spectrum of Buddhist practitioners both in ancient times and the present. As a feminist myself, I am delighted to see this; but I also think there needs to be a critical awareness of the advantages and limitations of specific approaches. Feminism is not a static set of ideas, but an evolving dialogue of perspectives.

One supposedly “feminist” take on the Therīgāthā turned out to be a scandalous case of literary fraud. <cite>The First Free Women</cite>, a work of original poetry by Matty Weingast, was sold and marketed as a translation, but a cursory reading reveals that it draws no more than a loose inspiration from the Therīgāthā. Despite this, readers believed that they were hearing the voices of the bhikkhunis, because that is what they were told. In actuality, they were hearing the voice of a man who leveraged the idea of feminism to steal the voices from the nuns.

A far more satisfying approach is the engaging, careful, and passionate work of Susan Murcott in her <cite>The First Buddhist Women</cite> (Parallax Press, 1991). The author calls it a “labor of love”, and that shows in every line. It includes translations of 61 of the 73 Therīgāthā poems, rearranged and connected with stories drawn from the commentaries. Murcott’s motivation stems from her encounters with Christian feminists, and her desire to find an approach that would both affirm the highest spiritual goals for women, and maintain institutional structures that support women equally. In Buddhism, the first criteria is clearly satisfied, while the second is problematic in terms of the scriptural heritage, and more so in the actual institutions. 

I think her book is an exemplary approach that offers a satisfyingly rich and full way of approaching the Therīgāthā; we should have more books like it. However, in her criticisms of the Buddhist contemplation of the foulness of the body she overstates her case; her fallback position is (a particular kind of) feminist body-positivity rather than a more nuanced consideration of the place of the body within Buddhist soteriology. But criticisms aside, there is an art and a nuance to conveying scripture for a general audience, and few have done it better.

Her translation is, appropriately, less literal than a purely linguistic one. One might suspect that a work motivated by feminism would tend translate the work to bring out a feminist reading. But that is not always the case. Take [thig5.2:3] for example, where the bhikkhunī Vimalā recalls her former days as a prostitute, when she would tease and entice men. Norman’s literal translation misses the point here, as he rather incongruously depicts her as performing conjuring (_māyā_). Murcott renders the line as “I was the woman of their dreams”. This puts Vimalā in a passive role, the subject of mens’ fantasies. The Pali itself, however, is very much active:

>*akāsiṁ vividhaṃ māyaṁ*    
I created an intricate illusion

It was through her work, her agency, that she did her job of enticing men. This is no mere sophistic detail, as it speaks to the heart of Buddhism, that we are agents who form our own world, and do not merely passively occupy it. We can choose to create a world of illusion that ensnares, or create one of truth that frees. This small example is interesting to me, because it shows that close attention to linguistic details can act as a guardrail that shields us from an overly subjective reading. And in doing so, it opens us up to the possibility that the text has something to teach us.

In her review of Murcott’s translation, George-Thérèse Dickenson (Tricycle, summer 1992) doubts the spiritual attainments claimed by the women of the Therīgāthā. She points to the case of the bhikkhunī Khemā, who is harassed by a young man who tries to get her to go and see a band together ([thig6.3]). Khemā objects, pointing out that her body is “rotting, ailing, and frail” and saying that she is “repelled” by it and has given up sensual desires. The young man turns out to be none other than Māra the “terminator” (_antakāra_), who is summarily vanquished by Khemā’s power. 

Dickenson questions whether Khemā can really be completely freed from suffering if she is saying such things. But one in the grip of lust focusses on the beautiful, so the Buddhist antidote is to see the other side, the rather undeniable fact that bodies are pretty icky. Yes, the language is strong; but then, so is desire. 

Dickenson further doubts Subha’s claims to be beyond passion, arguing that she shows admiration for the fullness and beauty of nature. It’s a weird argument, as there are plenty of cases in the early Buddhist texts—notably the verses of Mahākassapa—that show enlightened mendicants’ love of nature. More to the point, the words cited are ascribed by the text to the young man who accosts Subha. Dickenson misunderstands these as the words of Subha quoting the young man, whereas they are in fact his words as cited by an unknown narrator. Regardless, Dickenson is questioning whether Subha can report the words of a man talking sensually without herself feeling desire. It should, I hope, be obvious that it is perfectly normal to quote or refer to things without endorsing them.

Based on this mangling of both the text and the tenets of Buddhism, Dickenson concludes:

>These are instances in which the poem is asserting itself despite the intention of the poet. It is language coming to fullness, actualizing itself behind the speaker’s back.

Which is a way of saying that those nuns were deluded, that they understood neither their own minds nor the spiritual path in which they were practicing. Poems intended to highlight the power of a woman is read so as to undermine their realization. To offer an alternate perspective: those women knew exactly what they were doing and said exactly what they meant. It just doesn’t dovetail with the reviewer’s views. The Buddha said that it is hard for those who are themselves in the thrall of sensuality to understand those who are freed. Who are we to judge women who have found the freedom for which we long? 

I think the feminist reaction against Buddhist body contemplation is in need of revisiting. Indeed, attitudes towards the body are complex and changing within feminist circles. Too often the demand to “reclaim” the feminine body and its sexuality leads, in a fairly straight line, to exploitation and abuse at the hands of men on the one hand, and body-image distress among women on the other. Recent trends in feminist theory speak of body “neutrality” rather than “positivity”, a position that stands closer to that of early Buddhism. If we, as Buddhist feminists, showed a little less concern for current trends in theory, and a little more concern for what the early texts were actually saying, perhaps we might have contributed to the debate, rather than just holding its skirt. 

The early Buddhist texts have both positive and negative depictions of bodies, and this is completely realistic: bodies are both beautiful and disgusting. Buddhism is the original anti-essentialism. We don’t focus on one aspect of the body or another because that is the essence of what the body is, but in order to counter imbalances and lead to a healthy and reasonable equanimity.

Academic studies of the Therīgāthā highlight its complex and apparently contradictory attitudes towards women and the female body, which reflect those in the wider Buddhist tradition. Which is an important insight, because in every other culture in the world, ideas around gender and femininity are straightforward and uncontested. Oh wait.