

### Relation between the Prose and the Verse

 The most casual perusal of the Itivuttaka confirms, it seems to me, the statement made above that the prose portions of the 112 sections are disguised commentaries on the metrical portions of these 112 sections. In §18, for example, the verse says — “One that doth disturb the Order is tormented for an aeon in perdition”. The prose portion says on the same topic — “There is one thing, O monks, which, in coming into being, ariseth to the disadvantage and unhappiness of many people, to the detriment, disadvantage, and misery of many people, gods as well as men. What is this one thing? It is dissension in the Order. For in an Order that hath been divided, there are reciprocal quarrels as well as reciprocal abuse, reciprocal disagreement and desertion, and there (in such an Order) they are discontented and enjoy no contentment, and there is diversity of opinion (even) among those who are content”. Many similar examples might be adduced as illustrations of the point. 

 Even more decisive evidence is at hand, it seems to me, in §109. This section contains an allegorical passage about the Flood of Passion, with an enumeration of the dangers of the Flood. The prose takes up the different allegorical details, and proceeds to elucidate them as follows: “‘Flood of the river’ is the designation of Thirst; ‘pleasant and delightful in aspect’ is allegorically the designation of private dwellings; ‘a pool below’ is the designation of the five Bonds of sensual life; ‘with waves’ is the designation of the frenzy of anger; ‘with whirlpools’ is the designation of the five varieties of Lust; ‘with crocodiles and demons’ is the designation of womankind; ‘against the flood’ is the designation of Separation; ‘struggling with hands and feet’ is the designation of the exertion of one’s strength; ‘the spectator standing on the shore’ is the designation of the Consummate One, the Sanctified One, the Perfectly Enlightened One.” 

 Occasionally when the stanza is difficult of comprehension, or involved in impenetrable subtlety, the writer of the introductory prose adroitly crawls out of the difficulty and cleverly conceals his own miscomprehension of the verses, either by giving the baldest, broadest possible outlines of the verse, or by summing up the meaning in an ambiguous word or phrase. The latter point is best illustrated by §63, which, in my judgment, is the most difficult section of the whole book. A fuller treatment of this subject will be given in the course of the translation, in the notes on the various sections. 

 Another possible confirmation of this view as to the prose of the Itivuttaka, may be found in the more or less independent subject matter included in it for the purpose of filling out and amplifying the stanzas that follow. Although we hold to the above opinion as to the prose, it is by no means our intention to belittle its general value or its general interest. On the contrary the prose, although not so interesting as the verse, contains much that is of deep philosophical import, and its ethical dicta, although perhaps somewhat lacking in rhetorical polish, are lofty and noble in the extreme. 

## Poetry

 Before discussing the style and substance of the stanzas, it would be expedient to give here a full discussion of their form, that is of the meters in which they are composed. 

 But owing to the length and somewhat technical character of this metrical analysis, it seems unnecessary to include such a discussion, of interest only to the specialist, within the confines of this more or less general introduction. The metrical analysis of the Itivuttaka will be found in the Journal of the American Oriental Society, New Haven, Conn., vol. 28, pp. 317–330. In that article I have classified the various types of meter found in the Itivuttaka, and have arranged statistical tables. I have also made a comparison with Vedic meters and likewise with those of Epic poetry in Sanskrit. 

### Style

 Turning to the style of the stanzas in the book, we may appropriately devote a word of praise to their general simplicity. Hardly any trace is found of the artificial diction occasionally present in other Pali works, for example, in the professedly rhetorical Jinalaṅkāra of Buddharakkhita (edited and translated by James Gray, London, 1894), where we find (p. 10) the reversible line _namo tassa yato mahimato yassa tamo na_, which Gray renders: “Honor to him (Buddha), inasmuch as to him, deserving of honor, no darkness is”. No such artificialities are found in the Itivuttaka; there is likewise a total lack of internal rhyme, and also of the so-called paragrammatic echoing rhymes. Occasional instances of paronomasia are to be found, for example in §90, a passage of some interest, owing to the play on the word _agga_, “chief, top”, a term repeated eleven times in the course of the stanzas. 

### Figures of Speech

 Great assistance was obtained in making an examination of the rhetorical make-up of the Itivuttaka, from an opportune article by Mrs. Rhys Davids, entitled “Similes in the Nikāyas”, in the Journal of the Pali Text Society, London, 1906–7. The article consists of a painstaking list in Pali of similes in the whole range of books composing the Sutta-piṭaka, and it offers evidence of the most diligent toil. 

 In general the use of figures of speech in the Itivuttaka, while not sparing, is hardly abundant, there being a round fifty in the work. Although a few rather striking similes and metaphors are found, they are as a rule not especially vivid. We may conveniently divide the figures of speech into (a) those drawn from the realm of nature; (b) those from animals and their actions, and (c) those from man and his relations in daily life. 

(a) Among the most common figures of speech are similes based upon some natural phenomenon, the element of water playing an important part. This prominence of similes drawn from water is due to the frequent occurrence of the Buddhistic image that the righteous man is he that crosses (_tarati_) beyond, or to the other side (_para_) of the Flood (_ogha_) of Passion and Lust. The latter word, _ogha_, occurs but once (§107) in the course of the work, but the idea of crossing over it, _taraṇaṁ_, to the other shore, is quite frequent, as it occurs a dozen of times. Another more common word for the same idea is _samudda_, “ocean”, in the expression “he crosseth the ocean … difficult to traverse” (§69 c). The impulse of Passion or Desire is compared to a river (_nadī_) of rapid current (_sota_), with many a treacherous whirlpool (_āvaṭṭa_) to catch the helpless straggler (see §109). Different from this is the figure of the River of Subsistence (_āhāra-netti_) in §43. The drop of water (_udabindu_, §88 1) and the pool (_rahada_, §92 i) are other forms of aqueous metaphors. 

 Almost as frequent as the water comparisons are the various similes and metaphors based upon light. The sun and moon are naturally foremost among the more concrete images, and each is mentioned twice in the work (§§59d, 88 a” and §§27, 74 i, respectively). In the first moon-passage, we find mention also of the morning-star, _osadhi-taraka_. Luminous terms in comparisons are many; to the general word for light, _pabhā_ (§§27, 104), must be added _pajjota_, “brightness” (§104), _obhāsa_, “radiance”, _āloka_, “splendor”. The monks must be “torch-bearers” for the laymen who are in darkness. To the same category of images from the realm of light, belongs the passage on the “funeral torch” (§91) which illumines the village dunghill. Contrasting with these words, is the threefold occurrence of the idea of “darkness” in §§14 f, 38 e, 47 h. 

 Two other nature-images of a different kind are the vivid description of the bursting of a rain-cloud, with its resultant inundation (§75 o), and the eloquent stanzas in §24 with their simile of the lofty, mountain of Vulture Peak. 

(b) Turning next to the animal similes, we find that animal imagery is rare. The lion, _sīha_ (§112), the fish, _maccha_ (§76), and the shark or crocodile, _gaha_ (§§69, 109), alone are mentioned in comparisons; we might, however, include with them the _rakkhasas_, or “demons” (§69) which inhabit the ocean. An animal likeness is perhaps also to be discerned in the epithet _siṅgi_, “horned”, that is applied to a sinning monk in §108. 

(c) Much richer than the animal category, is the third class of similes and metaphors, namely, those derived from man and his relations in daily life. An interesting paragraph, probably to be taken allegorically, is found in §74, where there occurs a description of children who are superior or equal or inferior to their parents. A prototype of Bunyan’s hero. Christian, casting off his load, occurs in §44, where the Sanctified monk is said to have “laid his burden aside”. In §68, we hear the words of an Oriental psalmist, as it were, in the scathing epithet applied to erring sinners who are called in biting phrase “Bond of Māra, ye snare of Māra (i. e. the Devil)”. A fine image occurs in §§28, 29, where the monks are exhorted to keep the “doors” to their senses closely guarded. The “door” is used again in personification in §84 where the Great Sage and his faithful followers are said to disclose the “door of Immortality (_dvāraṁ amatassa_)”. 

 Among other objects of every-day life which are used figuratively, may be mentioned the arrow {sara) that imparts to its quiver (_kalapa_) the poison with which it is smeared (§76). Further the javelin (_salla_) is used symbolically of pain or suffering (§53). Various other comparisons, drawn this time from the vegetable realm, are of less importance; such for example is the figurative use of _mūla_, “root” (§42 c), _tasa-sara_, “of excellent bark”, i. e. the bamboo (§56), and _tala-pakka_, “the ripe Tal fruit, or Palmyra” (§88x). Finally we may refer to two epithets applied to the Master, Buddha, one where he is called the “charioteer”, and the other, an interesting phrase found in §100, where he calls himself “the brahman ... a healer, or physician, who is a ‘causer of pain’ _sallakatta_”. 

### Synonyms and Titles of Buddha

 Reference has already been made (p. 4) to the use in the Itivuttaka of many titles and appelatives given to Gotama. Although one would of course presuppose a use of such epithets in the course of the prose portions of the work, we would hardly expect to find them in the verses, which are professed to be the Master’s own words to his disciples. He is spoken of impersonally in the verses as Buddha, ” the Enlightened One “( §§21 d, 35 h, 36 h, 52 b, 54 b, 56 b, 68 e, 90 c, 112 i, m); as Tathāgata Buddha, “the Consummate, Enlightened One “(§§38 a, 39 a); as Tathāgata alone, “the Consummate One” (§89J, u); as Sammāsambuddha, “the Perfectly Enlightened One” (§§511, 73111). Occasionally other adjectives are employed, such as, for example, Bhagavan, “the Blessed One” (§§3Sc, 36c, 98b); Mahesi, the “Great Sage” (§§24d, 26b, 35 f, 36 f, 84 a), and also Purisuttama, “the Excellent One” (§61 d). This inclusion of the word Buddha or other titles for Gotama within the stanzas themselves neither proves nor disproves his authorship of them. 

### Use of Internal Quotations

 In further connection with this whole question of quotation, that is to say, of citation of formulas within the stanzas, which attest Buddha as the author, we may note the fact that in one stanza (§69h) the Master’s words are given direct, with the added words _iti brūmi_, “so I say, so I declare”, within the stanza itself. This direct discourse is also found several times in the Dhammapada, compare, for example, verses 409–414 and many others. Redundant quotes of an indirect character, that is to say in the third person, are found in the following verses: _yathā vuttaṁ mahesinā_, “so was it said by the Great Sage “(§26 b), and _akkhāsi purisuttamo_, “the Excellent One hath proclaimed” (§61 d). In my opinion these lines were introduced into the stanzas by the compiler of the Itivuttaka, in order to fill the metrical requirements to give the stanzas the proper number of verses. That is, it seems probable that the compiler took from some earlier work, whether an oral or a written one, it is not known, a certain number of verses; in order to have of these verses the number requisite to make a complete group, or stanza, he added in the stanza such superfluous statements of Buddha’s authorship. Additional confirmation of this view is to be found, it seems to me, in the words _ti me sutaṁ_, “so I have heard”, introduced into verse h of §89. 

### Stanzas not addressed to the Laity

 Although the poetical portion of the Itivuttaka is far from being so didactic as the prose that paraphrases it, nevertheless in the stanzas themselves the didactic element is well marked. The appeal of this collection of Buddha’s teachings was not addressed to the laity in general, for, as remarked above, they were directed to his bhikkhus, the Brethren of the Buddhist Order. Although the term _bhikkhu_, “monk”, does not occur in the stanzas with the same tiresome frequency with which it is reiterated in the prose, yet the word is found no less than thirty times within the verses of this book. This frequent occurrence of the word “monk” deserves some emphasis, in order to point out forcibly that Buddha’s teaching, as set forth in the Itivuttaka, was distinctly not a world-teaching, a wide, universal exhortation of mankind to higher ideals, but was, on the contrary, confined to a comparatively narrow circle of monastic followers. 

## Inter-canonical Quotation

 The view has been more than once advanced in this essay that the Itivuttaka is probably a compilation from various works of the Pali canon; if this view be right, the date of the compilation of the Itivuttaka must of course be later than the composition of the other Buddhistic works from which it is derived. Although this view may be substantiated in several ways from internal evidence, it cannot, unfortunately, be definitely proved until a complete concordance of all the canonical works (some of which have not yet even been edited), has been made. While preparing this translation, I made a beginning of such a concordance, or cross-reference work, commencing with the Jatakas, and had collected a large number of index slips, when I learned that Professor R. O. Franke, of Konigsberg, was already at work upon a complete first-line index of the Pali canon, which is to be published in the Harvard Oriental Series. Accordingly I abandoned the task so as to avoid a duplication of the work. It is not possible, therefore, to settle the interesting question of inter-canonical quotation until Dr. Franke’s valuable concordance is completed. A few such cross-references, however, may be made, to show the possibility of further developments in this line. The Itivuttaka, for instance, has four passages in common with the Dhammapada, a work which is itself a compilation, or anthology. Thus Iti-v., §§25 a–d, and 48 a–l, are identical with Dhp., vs. 176, 306–8. Not only are these four verses common to the two works, but many intangible likenesses in style, in expression, and in phrasing are to be observed. Several rather brief identical passages are to be found in the Samyutta nikāya (edited by Feer, PTS., London, 1884–1904), and these are noted by Windisch in the critical notes to his edition. Many long passages in the latter sections of the Itivuttaka, he observes, are repeated, verbatim, in the Anguttaranikāya. This coincidence, when taken together with the different character generally of the latter part of the Itivuttaka, and also in connection with the fact that so many of the latter sections are not to be found in the Chinese translation of the work by Yuan Chwang (Huan Tsang) (see Watanabe, Chinese Collection of Itivuttakas, in JPTS., London, 1907, pp. 44–49), seems, in my opinion, to show that many of the latter sections of this book are of later introduction as compared with the former portions. 

## Grammar

 In the course of this translation there are given in the notes a number of interesting grammatical points presented by the language of the Itivuttaka, both in respect to inflection and syntax. Although a discussion of such matters would naturally be out of place here, we may briefly outline a few of the more important questions. In inflection there occur several archaic plurals, which we may term Vedic plurals, and which are occasionally found elsewhere in Pali. Thus _luddhāse_, _dutthāse_, _mulhāse_, _kuddhāse_, _makkhāse_, _mattāse_ in the first six sections, in place of the more usual forms _luddhā_, _dutthā_, _muḷhā_, etc. One instance of the use of a dative case as an infinitive is worth noting (see §86, note i). There are two examples of the exceedingly rare conditional mood, _agamissa_ (§42. 7), and _abhavissa_ (§43. 3). In syntax we may note the very common use of the gerund and gerundive, particularly of the former. The gerund ending _-tvāna_, corresponding to the Vedic _-tvānam_ occurs nine times. The use of the aorist as an indefinite past tense is very common, occurring on every page of the book. The syntax of the stanzas is usually quite simple, but occasional inversions and omissions of verbs are found, and these instances will be found treated in the notes. The style is somewhat marred by the frequent use of the indefinite relative clause, and this slight stylistic blemish, or mannerism, is but too manifest, I fear, in the translation. 

## Vocabulary

 The choice of words in the Itivuttaka is naturally dependent on the subject matter, and is to be expected that the words should be largely religious terms. The work is rich in categorical moral terms, with their opposites, such as Friendliness, Charity, Virtue, Lust, Hate, Sloth, and many others. In rendering these words into English a translator is beset with a task of some difficulty. The various European translators of Buddhistic works show great lack of accord in their ways of translating these and other cardinal words. I have naturally felt some hesitation in deviating from such great scholars as have helped to open up the vast field of Buddhist history and religion, but it is absolutely impossible to keep in harmony with all, so that an eclectic attitude has been adopted. Where, however, there is general accord among European translators — such as, for example, in the translation of the Pali terms _upādi_, _khandha_, _samkhāra_, _samkhata_, by “Substrata”, “Attribute”, “Aggregate”, “Compound”— I have not differed from them save for the weightiest reasons. 

 Besides this matter there are other obstacles before a translator. Even where the meaning of a certain Pali word is clear, and when only a single English equivalent exists, this English word unfortunately has sometimes one or more connotations which do not belong to the Pali term at all. Such, for example, is the word _vimutti_, rendered “Emancipation”, for here the English, as I think, has a religious implication foreign to the Pali. To avoid having the reader in this way read too much into the Pali sentences, owing to his having taken the English with too full an extension perhaps, I have adopted, where necessary, the plan of capitalizing the English words, thus — Sin, Delusion, Faith, and similar terms. The reader will, therefore, be on his guard against taking such words in their full English meaning with all nuances and connotations. For the convenience of the reader a list of the more important Pali terms, with my English renderings of them, is included in the index. 

## Other Difficulties of Translation

 The question of Pali etymology is largely based on comparison with analogous forms in Sanskrit. A blind adherence to Sanskrit as an aid to solving questions of etymology in Pali is not to be indulged in, for without doubt the Pali language, although it has the greatest similarity with the Sanskrit in grammar and vocabulary, has cut out for itself, in many respects, entirely new linguistic paths. The rise of Buddhism, and also of the Jaina sect, taken together with the ever-increasing use of Pali as a means of literary expression, was not without influence on the Sanskrit. 

 Unfortunately, however, there are times when etymology is both doubtful and perplexing. In this particular respect it must be said that the Pali Dictionary of Childers (London, 1875) is often inadequate and faulty, but we could not expect it to be otherwise of such a pioneer work. To say that this dictionary abounds in omissions, errors, mistakes, and confusions, or to say that its list of words is from a very limited portion of Pali literature, is merely to say that it is the first and only occidental dictionary of the Pali language. Considering the paucity of published texts in Childers’ day, the retarded state of philological information at the time, and the general lack of facilities for such a work, we must look on his achievement as little short of marvelous. But from the nature of the case, the book is unreliable in many respects. Turning to the grammars of Pali which we now have, we find much left to be desired. For etymological purposes Franke’s <cite>Pali und Sanskrit</cite> (Strassburg, 1902) is of great use. The same may be said of the <cite>Grammaire Pālie</cite> of Henry (Paris, 1904), though it errs in many ways both in treatment and content. A comprehensive grammar of Pali, similar to Whitney’s <cite>Sanskrit Grammar</cite>, would fill a longfelt need, as would also a biographical and mythological Buddhist encyclopedia. In etymology, therefore, as in other matters, rigorous testing must be done at every step, and the suggestions that are here given in the notes as to new solutions are presented with the caution proper in the present state of Pali linguistics. The meaning of such a word as _nipaka_, “prudent”, for example, is fairly certain, but its etymology is far from clear; vice versa there are one or two instances of words whose etymology is obvious, but whose precise significance it is almost hopeless to determine. 

 It seems desirable in a work of this character to try to render a word always by a constant, unchanging English word. But although this process may be advisable as a rule, it is by no means always feasible in practice. As Paul Cauer, in his admirable little work, <cite>Die Kunst des Ubersetzens</cite>, Berlin, 1894, p. 48, indicates from the classical standpoint, a qualifying adjective, a varying context, a change in locution, frequently necessitates a different rendering for the same word of the text. In this present translation it has sometimes been necessary to follow this procedure; a noun and a verb, or a noun and an adjective, for instance, which may come from the same Pali root, have had occasionally to be translated by two words from different roots in English. 

 It is hoped, furthermore, that the plentiful citation of the obscurer or less common Pali words within parentheses will enable the reader to use this translation for comparative purposes by the side of other translations from Pali texts. It has been thought best to give throughout a fairly literal rendering. The conciseness of the Pali makes the unavoidable amplitude of the English seem somewhat rigid and verbose in comparison. It is hoped that my strict adherence to the original will not be found too close; for when it has become a question of preference between an elegant rendering and one awkward but more accurate, I have purposely always chosen the latter. It was found impossible to make a metrical translation of the stanzas which should be at all faithful or close to the original. As an aid to the appreciation of the spirit, or tone, of the book, I have made use of the archaic English ending -eth in the verbal forms throughout. 

